Keep things moving with them.
So we're gonna start with the, um, special Olympics.
Wellington, welcome. Thanks for joining us.
Um, some, some of the, we're in subcommittees, so some
of those will be online.
Um, there are more of us than it looks like,
but you'll have 10 minutes for your submission.
I'll let you know when there's a minute to go.
You can take this written submission, we've got as read,
but the, the time is yours.
Okay. Okay.
Thank you for the opportunity
to present this submission on the online
casino gambling bill.
My name is Christine Richardson,
and I'm submitting on behalf of Special Olympics te.
Our Wellington Base Club supports approximately 100 athletes
with intellectual disabilities across a range of sports,
including athletics, swimming, basketball, bowling, bocce,
football, and equestrian in partnership
with Pat Valley Riding for the Disabled.
This work is made possible by the dedication of
around 45 volunteers who coach training
and organize competition opportunities throughout the year,
as well as the additional administrative tasks that come
with running a community organization.
Uh, for myself, I've been actively involved
with Special Olympics for, I don't know,
more than 15 years, I think.
And I've served in the following capacity, uh, chairperson
of, uh, of our club, chairperson
of the Lower North Island Regional Council member
of the Special Olympics New Zealand Board for six years,
and currently a member
of the Special Olympics New Zealand
Governance Board appointments.
Currently, I serve as our club's treasurer,
registrations administrator, volunteer coordinator,
and fundraising coordinator.
I also manage administration for our basketball
and bowling programs,
and I maintain close relationships with the athletes
and their families who are involved in these sports
all on a voluntary basis.
Given this experience, I believe I'm well placed
to comment on the role of gambling derived funding within
our Special Olympics Club.
I sought to understand the rationale
for the cabinet policy decision not
to require community benefit from online casino gambling.
I found the minister's paper report back on online casino
gambling regulatory design,
and in particular, I saw paragraph three,
which 23, which states that I am recommending
that online casino gambling operators not be required
to make community returns.
It also creates perverse incentives to increase gambling
activity as a means to increase revenue streams
for community organizations.
And if that's true, community organizations need fi
financial help from other sources not related to gambling.
It goes on to say, in addition,
by adding further financial requirements on top of
tax duties, levies, New Zealand would become one
of the highest taxed jurisdictions for online gambling,
making licenses less valuable and attractive.
My my comment on that is
that surely the enormous profitability of online gambling
is such that a requirement
to provide at least some community return would not deter
operators from seeking licenses, the potential for harm
to community funding streams
by omitting the community benefit principle.
Far outweighs concerns about license
attractiveness, in my view.
Paragraph 24 includes the following.
There's a risk that competition from the new online casino
operators will have an effect on community distributions
from other types of gambling over time.
There is insufficient data available
to quantify any impact on sports or other community funding,
and it remains to be seen how regulating online
gambling influences gambling behavior.
I understand that other submitters have
provided evidence from international jurisdictions
that demonstrates
what happens when online gambling is rolled out.
If no community contribution is required from on online
casino gambling, the damage will be done
before it can be measured, the horse will have bolted.
So, turning to the realities, uh, for our Club
of Gaming Trust funding, it's a rigorous
and uncertain process,
and you may possibly know from personal experience,
it's not a simple matter of submitting a request
to a gaming trust and automatically receiving funds.
Many applications are declined due to limited funds,
and no community organization that I'm aware
of has a guaranteed perpetual funding pipeline
from gaming trusts.
So, because of the uncertainty of receiving funding,
funding, our club has worked hard
to diversify our funding sources,
but we are part of a wider network
of Special Olympics clubs in the lower North Island, many
of which do rely on gaming trust funding
to keep event costs manageable
when applications are unsuccessful.
Costs fall on all club participants
or events risk being canceled.
Special Olympics New Zealand, uh, SAS
that is our parent body supports 42 clubs nationwide
and hosts national summer games every four years.
These are pinnacle events for our athletes.
Soms does its best to keep the registration fees down
and to ensure equitable access for our club members.
We must fundraise extensively in summer games years,
gaming trust funding usually becomes essential due
to high cost of registration and travel.
The projected cost for our club to participate in the 2020
national summer games is 125,000,
but this year our club has received 13,900 in gaming trust
funding and is awaiting the outcome
of two further applications total, uh,
$23,693.
So that the total of those two, if we get that money,
is 33% of the cost coming from gaining trust funds.
I provided examples
of three athletes in my written submission
to describe the circumstances. One,
And no, you've got, you've got a couple of minutes left.
Their circumstances are not unusual.
Many athletes rely on benefits
or work part-time in low income roles.
Discretionary income is limited
and families have to often contribute financially
to ensure their loved ones can participate in inclusive
meaningful sporting activities.
A number of our athletes live in supported accommodation.
Several have no family support at all,
and it's essential that we make participation affordable
for everyone.
I respectfully urge the committee
to ensure parity across gambling operators
by applying the same principle of community benefit
to online casinos, as is currently required
of physical gambling venues,
and to ensure the legislation enables a rate to be struck
for such contribution.
So specifically, I ask the committee
to embed in the bill a clause equivalent to clause 3G
of the Gambling Act 2003, ensure
that gambling benefits the community,
and to make that actionable
to include a provision enabling the development
of regulations to determine the amount of community return
required from online casino operators.
Thank you for considering the submission.
Thank you for an excellent submission,
really clear recommendation.
And I, and I did enjoy reading the three examples of I,
Irene, William, and Leonard, was it that you'd given us.
So thank, thank you for putting that personal touch in.
Um, I just invite, um, Limon, Lydia Soni to ask a question.
Thank you. And I wanted to acknowledge extensive work, uh,
with the Special Olympics.
They're members of our community
that we need to include that.
Uh, my question is, uh, with regards
to the digital disruption, which was just
after the case studies, the digital disruption,
which is a lot of things are moving online.
Mm-hmm. How is, uh, your community group coping with that?
And obviously if you don't get more community funding all
through this bill, you are highlighting specific example
of Special Olympics, the impact of that.
So I'm, I'm sorry. You, oh, so I wanted to understand,
because a lot of operations are moving online, not just
with this bill, but how has it impacted Special Olympics,
but also, um, the community funding that you are, um,
advocating for, uh, the impact of that,
because you've clearly put it out in your submission,
and I would want to know further
that you could speak further to that.
So you're asking us what, what we need to do. Yeah.
So how have you coped with online now in, in operations?
How has, how have you adapted Special Olympics to that?
But also the further impact regarding community funding?
Um, we've adapted it through, um, the use of a, our,
our parent body, um, database.
So we do a lot of online,
all registration is now done online.
Okay. And, uh, it's much easier now. Yeah. Okay.
And so we are very comfortable with, with that, uh, aspect,
it's, we're moving our website.
Uh, it, it's an database called Sporty,
and it's rolled out across all of the clubs by soms.
So we have, uh, adapted to that.
Um, and has that had to grow over time, given that a lot
of operations for clubs, uh, et cetera,
now have rely on online, um, operations for your club?
How have you managed? Not, not really a lot
of our operations, if you're talking about, um,
sport training every week.
Yeah. Um, it's often a matter of whichever channel, um,
it takes, which can be telephone, text, um, email,
uh, because of the different circumstances,
the very different circumstances, the people involved.
Okay. So, so I'm very comfortable with, um, messenger,
uh, signal text.
Okay. In order to communicate. Okay. Yeah. Thank you.
That's all I wanted to ask.
Thank you very much for taking the time
to come in, in person today.
We really appreciate your submission. Um, thank you.
And we are going to move on to Gordon, ah,
and John, so please come forward for the New Zealand, um,
amateur Sport Association.
Yeah. You'll know this committee as they will,
uh, know you well as well.
We've got Tom and, and one other online.
Brilliant. Um, same deal. 10 minutes.
I'll let you know when there's a minute to run.
Save some time. Absolutely. If you like floor
This. Fantastic. That'd
be great. Well, thank you.
Uh, we really appreciate having this opportunity
to speak to the committee.
And today we are here about solutions, having acknowledged
that there are some issues associated with this bill.
Um, as you would've read in our written submission,
we've made seven recommended amendments to the bill
of which we'd like to highlight three
specific points supporting those seven changes.
Firstly, we've read the bill carefully
and we note that there is nothing in there
to offset the harm caused by online casino gambling
only recognition of the need
for minimization and prevention.
So that's the point number one.
Second is the, we believe the normalization
and legitimization of online gambling is going
to reduce gambling activity in physical locations,
therefore reducing class four gambling net proceeds.
And the third point we'd like to focus on is
that the establishment of a new trust fund financed
by fees collected from online operators,
will provide an effective means to offset social harm
and maintain key community funding.
So it's really simple in our point of view.
From our point of view. However, we submit
that if these amendments are not accepted,
the overall intent
and success of the bill will be substantially diminished
with unintended consequences
for community sport in particular.
And you would've heard or will be hearing from many, uh,
submitters on this particular point.
I'm sure. Now we've got data to back us up.
The National Sport Club survey
over 7,000 community sport clubs has told us that 72%
of community sport organizations are concerned about their
long-term financial sustainability.
For example, we know that most
of their basic operating costs are funded
through ca Class four gambling grant funding with over half
of sport clubs indicating they can only afford, uh,
for example, to replace their playing apparel once
every nine to 10 years.
So there's a practical example there
of the importance of the funding.
Now, moreover, if our recommendations are not adopted,
we believe this bill will accelerate the voluntary
and involuntary dissolution of community sport organizations
because of the effect of reduced grant funding.
And this will compound the effects
of the Incorporated Societies Act 2022, which we've spoken
to government about on, on many occasions between the, uh,
passing of that legislation and today.
So in summary, our recommended amendments are this,
that within the bill there is, uh, the provision
to establish a trust fund for community funding purposes.
That the fund will be established
through a community support fee paid by the 15 licensees,
or whatever number of licensees there are, that the payment
for the operation of the fund will come
through the community support fee.
And that the fund will be administered
through the Department of Internal Affairs,
which is very familiar with this type of mechanism.
So if there are 15 licenses intended
to be issued under the bill, we suggest
that the community support fee could be a fixed annual sum,
which we propose based on international comparators is in
the range of 75,000
to $100,000 per licensee per annum,
creating an annual distributor trust fund between 1.12
and $1.5 million.
It's a drop in the bucket in the great scheme of things,
but it's an important drop in a very important bucket.
We suggest that the cost of establishing
and operating the fund could be set at 10%
of the annual agreed fee, meaning
that the total community support fee payable each year
by licensed operators in total would be between one
and a quarter of million and $1.65 million.
And if that those funds were available for grant purposes
as per, uh, the gambling act, then that will create
a tangible means of offsetting actual community harm.
No doubt about that whatsoever.
We note that the distribution
of grants from the trust fund will only be able to be made
to entities rather than natural persons.
And that can be easily dealt with in the definitions
of the act where we've created a definition helpfully
for eligible entity.
Uh, the proposed model is one which is well understood
and commonly applied today, we would submit
and will not require new legislation
or regulation to implement outside of the seven amendments,
which can be easily accommodated in the bill without
changing the substantive nature, purpose,
or intent of the bill.
So in summary,
before I pass over to John for a few comments, we propose
that our solution will UB submit.
It's elegant, it's simple to understand and implement.
It's unlikely to be burdensome
or financially opposed by license operators.
And it will be welcomed by the not-for-profit sector,
which increasingly relies on grant funding income
to make ends meet in what is, as you will all know,
a remarkably challenging environment for all social
entities involved in delivering considerable value
to our New Zealand communities.
We hope that, uh, our submission both in written form the
recommendations and this submission today, uh,
will help our local clubs, our local community sport clubs,
to remain the backbone of all that epitomizes the spirit
of amateur sport and its key role in the social development
of communities throughout New Zealand.
So we are here to help not to hinder.
So if the bill goes through into law,
here is a simple way in order to remedy
what is a substantial hole in the construct,
which would've been identified earlier in the drafting.
Had officials taken the time to speak
to the community at large,
which we note in our submission, they did not do.
John, you wanted some comments? Yes.
Uh, thank you, Gordon. Thanks, uh, Tim.
Um, I, I think it's pretty obvious
that our community sports clubs
and community clubs are the backbone of most
of our communities.
And they've been under siege in all sorts of ways,
financially, particularly, uh, we don't want to come here
and just bagg the whole bill and say throw it out.
'cause you probably won't do that.
Um, what we do want to do is suggest changes. Yeah.
That can make it a little easier.
I don't think there's any doubt that if you, uh, endorse
online betting, which you can do now, all that'll happen
will, people will do it more, at least
with the pokies, for example.
Uh, one has to go out and socialize
and be, ensure they've got some downsides.
But the upside is the community benefit,
which most community, uh, clubs and, uh, sports clubs
and, and other clubs, uh, benefit immensely,
take that money away.
And as Gordon has pointed out in our submission,
and many of our sports clubs, uh, the amateur side,
the community side will struggle
and we should be encouraging 'em, uh,
not making them struggle more.
So we ask you to consider our amendments.
Don't have to throw the whole whole thing out.
Um, but, um, please give us,
give our guys a chance, as it were.
Keith, can I ask two, two questions just on that one.
You are proposing this sort of structured fee of a,
for example, a hundred thousand dollars versus
what many other people have said is just make it the same
sort of percentage of, of of gross income that, um,
that, that say, uh,
the local RSA pays off their pokies. Well, why the difference?
Well, the reason is, is is the reason why this bill's been
created because clearly there was a fear
that the online casino gamblers confronted with a bill
for a percentage of net proceeds, would've said,
excuse the expression, get stuffed, will carry on
and offer our services into New Zealand,
which you can access via VPN or other mechanisms.
So clearly this bill is wanting to regulate an unregulated,
uh, set of international operators.
What we are proposing is a very small IM position.
We believe in terms of their what,
which they'll probably say, oh, yeah,
okay, we'll write the check.
And, and the second part is you're proposing a trust fund.
Wh why that, um, uh, compared to say something
that's already exists like the lotteries board.
W why not just use the existing mechanisms
to distribute it? Do you have a view?
I'm happy to do that, but you would still need to re
to create the fund itself in the context
of the legislation in order to collect the fee
and bank it, so to speak.
But you're right, in terms of the administering of it
through the lotteries commission, why not?
Um, whatever mechanism, whatever mechanism is most efficient
to distribute the money is absolutely fine.
We don't need to rebuild it,
but we'll need to accommodate it in the context
of the construction of, of, of the bill.
Thank you. Yeah. Uh, just to supplement you mm-hmm.
Um, were you able to consult with any of your, um,
colleagues in this, in this area in terms of supporting,
uh, what you've put on the table?
Absolutely. We have. So this,
our written submission went out to our entire membership
and has been distributed throughout New Zealand.
In fact, it's also landed on the desks of all members
of Parliament, I believe, as well.
Uh, and the feedback in relation to it is very positive.
Why? Because we are trying to fix something.
We're not actually saying it's a bad idea, which is
what a lot of people I,
I think wouldn't invariably be saying.
And we get that. Um, that's the, that's the go-to place
because of it'll cut the, you know, the class four,
uh, gambling proceeds.
So here's a way where you achieve two objectives.
You get the regulation in place, which is necessary,
and you offset the harm,
which we know is created irrespective.
And, and we, we we're a national body, we were in contact
with the vast majority of amateur sports clubs,
whatever sport where we're not, we're not rugby
or cricket or whatever.
That's right across the board. Okay. Ton Co.
You name it, we're into it. John
Likes Paton these days.
Well, I'm sorry, we're gonna have
to finish there 'cause we're slightly over time.
Thank you for coming in in a
really clear submission as well. Thank
You. Good on you. Thank
you.
Thanks very Much. With that, we'll move on
to the Gaming Machine Association,
who I think, uh, in the room.
Yes, sir. Oh, fantastic. Is it Peter?
Peter? Yes. Good afternoon.
Well, uh, the same, same drill for you. Uh, 10 minutes.
I'll let you know with a minute to run. And floor is yours.
Thank you. So thank you for having us.
Uh, I wonder if I could just start with, uh, some context.
Um, so one on seven Kiwis Gamble at least once a year.
Uh, class four, uh, takes in over a billion dollars a year.
Uh, it has one of the best rates of return, not statutory.
We return 92% of that, uh, of, of the money
to the community, uh, back to the gambler rather.
Um, the billion dollars that that comes into the industry,
we distribute roughly on a one third, one third,
one third basis, about a third to the government by way
of GST and, and taxes
and duties, uh, about a third to run the operations.
Uh, and about a third goes back to the community,
uh, by way of grants.
And of that third that goes into running the operation,
about 160 million of that is going to the hotels
by way of commission.
And so that's an important earn income earner for lots
of hotels, which are paying staff, et cetera.
So there's, there's a lot going on there.
The rate of problem gambling in New Zealand is measured, uh,
annually and regularly by the Ministry
of Health using an international protocol called the, uh,
problem Gambling Severity Index.
And as a result of that, we know that the rate
of problem gambling in New Zealand is between N 0.1
and N 0.2% of the population over 16 years of age
summaries in the Ministry of Health treats 16 year olds
as the, as the cutoff points,
they're actually talking about a large part
of the adult population.
Uh, but N 0.1% of that population,
or 0.2%, uh, are, are rated as problem gamblers.
That very low rate of problem gambling
and the rest of the system is one
of the reasons why we see very little relationship
between gambling and organized crime in New Zealand.
New Zealand's one of the rare countries where
gambling is run by trusts in the public interest
with a return to the community.
It's very well regulated, it's very transparent.
You can go in and see how much money each
of the trusts earns and how they spend it.
And that's very different from
what happens in many other countries.
And I just mentioned that context so that you're clear, uh,
about the size and scope
and scale, uh, of the, of the industry
that this bill is attempting to, um, intrude into.
G AZ itself is the peak body for Class four,
which is the largest contributor
to the problem gambling levy.
And there's an indication there of the billion dollars
that the industry takes in about 28 million
or not 0.28% is spent by the government on problem gambling,
um, at a very high level submission.
I, I this the problem, one of the problems with this bill is
that so much of the work that's actually gonna have
to be done as being left to the regulations, what I'd like
to do after that initial context is just pick up seven
points that are in our written submission.
Unless you had a question.
No, if this is the ones in paragraph four, that would be
Fantastic.
Uh, now I'm gonna take that as read. Okay, great.
I'm gonna start, uh, at paragraph, uh, five
and say, um, if it's possible
to stop unlicensed operators now,
why don't we stop them all?
At the moment, the argument is that we need to regulate
to control these, uh, off, uh, offshore gamblers,
but we say, well, if you can stop them,
why don't you stop all of them?
And if you can't, uh,
then it cast serious doubts on the ability to police
and regulate this space.
The second point I wanna highlight is the, uh,
if it's possible to protect Lotto Powerball
and Strike, why not protect existing Class four?
And others have spoken about the need for parity.
It's not clear to us why one form
or some forms of gambling are protected against the
intrusion of this new technology.
Uh, why not a protection for Class four, given its size,
scale, and the role that it plays in the community.
Uh, the next point I'd like to make is from paragraph 15.
Uh, and we spend quite a lot of time in,
there's photographs about this.
The law should preclude the setting up of fake gaming rooms
where patrons can sit around and play games online, but off,
but offshore operators on laptops or iPads.
And the reason for that is
because they will be sitting in a gaming room,
but without any of the protections
that the current system provides patrons of gaming rooms.
Mm-hmm. Now, what I won't do,
but we'll point you to paragraph 22, which is a list of all
of the regulations that apply currently to class four.
These are the things that we say are not going to apply
and would not apply if there was a fake gaming room set up,
Turning then through those pages where we show you
what a fake gaming room might look like.
Yeah. And we've given you some draft
wording for legislation.
We pick up the point, uh, at paragraph 23.
We think there should be mandatory consultation
with the existing players.
In other words, when some of the serious issues come to, uh,
be regulated, and those are harm minimization, which we deal
with on a daily basis, advertising of games, uh,
and the standards by which those games are set up.
There are existing provisions
for mandatory consultation in the act.
And we think this should extend to these circumstances.
And this is partly an echo
of my comment about the difficulty
with drafting the regulations.
The regulations, the act will say there should be no harm,
but the regulations which actually try
and prescribe how you control harm
and how you minimize harm is gonna be very difficult.
So that we think the mandatory consultation at that point
with the people who are doing this on a daily
basis is essential.
Uh, if there are gonna be licenses, we say a couple
of things about who should be receiving them.
We think that there should be,
and I'm at paragraph 30 of our submission,
we think some should be set aside specifically
for non-profit organizations with a demonstrated commitment
to supporting New Zealand communities rather than an auction
process, which simply turns out, uh,
provides licenses to the richest players.
We think why not look at applicants based
and set on their wealth based on their community
contributions and their integrity?
And as a separate concept of that, we think
that some licenses in any event, should be reserved
for New Zealand based providers.
As examples that I'm familiar with from my world, time in,
in the internet world, for example,
registering a domain name in Australia,
you have a local presence requirement.
You can't register an Australian domain
unless you have an Australian
trademark or an Australian company.
There's, there's many other examples in the law
where a local presence requirement is in this.
And, and we think the same should require, uh,
a should prevail here, it would ensure that a minimum number
of operators who are local providers would pay tax.
In New Zealand,
We, uh, will say very little about paragraph 40,
which others have submitted on.
We think that online casino providers should be subject
to a requirement to pay 40% of their gross profits.
That's the gambling revenue list prizes
to the New Zealand community.
And I'd like to close, I think, with a comment on the, uh,
perverse incentive pa part of the, uh, uh,
the cabinet paper, which originally set this up.
And we think that the entire concept for not requiring, um,
on offshore providers to pay is partly that, uh,
it would somehow increase the reliance on gambling.
Uh, the, the short answer to that is there is no evidence,
uh, that the dependence of clubs
that have they have on the funding makes any difference at
all to the rate either of gambling in New Zealand
or the rate of problem gambling in New Zealand.
The two entirely separate matters, the recipients
of the funding are not the gamblers,
nor are they the problem gamblers.
So to link the two together like
that is a false equivalence.
So those are our submissions.
Thank you. And, and still with 30 seconds to spare,
well timed, I'll just see if there are any questions
online or in the room.
I had one, it was around just very quickly
through the chair, um, the parish
where you made the comment, how come it's easy
for Lot strike and, and that versus this option.
Can you elaborate a little bit further on that? Well,
It goes back to one of the problems
with gambling legislation in general is
that there are different silos with different sets of rules.
Most people don't understand that there's a set of rules
for casinos, which is different from lotto,
which is different from TAB different for class four.
So one of our constant submissions in four are like, this is
to say, let's try and equalize to make it easy
for the department to regulate,
but also to make it fairer across the
board for all the operators.
And so this is an extension of that
different ga gambling operation.
Uh, gambling operator should be treated equally
unless there are good reasons not to.
Thank you. And thank you very much
for your time coming in today.
We are out time there. Are you happy?
And we're gonna move to an online hearing now from, uh,
New Zealand Rugby Union.
I'll just wait for them to, are they with us?
Uh, can you hear me or see me? Yeah,
We've got you loud and clear.
So you've got 10 minutes.
Um, I'll let you know when there's a minute to run,
but if you'd like to leave some
time for questions, that'll be great.
It's all yours.
Thank you. Uh, thank you Aaron,
for the opportunity to speak today.
Um, at New Zealand Rugby,
we certainly understand the importance
of evolving legislation
to meet the realities of a digital world.
We support the intent of this bill to reduce harm, uh,
gambling harm, and bring offshore operators into a
regulated framework.
But we must be clear, the current draft misses a critical
opportunity to protect
and sustain the communities most impacted
by gambling for decades.
Glass Class four gambling has
provided vital funding for community organizations
and causes, including grassroots sport across
New Zealand and rugby alone.
Over $27 million in grants last year supported more than 400
clubs, clubs that are the beating heart
of these communities,
and they certainly deliver far more than sport.
They offer connection purpose, a sense of being an identity.
The bill, as it stands, not only legitimizes online casino
gambling in New Zealand, it gives a preferred status over
Class four gambling on which community organizations rely
through funding grants as well as relieving operators
of any obligation to return a share
of profits to the public good.
The bill gives online casinos the ability to advertise
where class four operators cannot.
Global and New Zealand trends together with the growth
of online gambling through the TAB
and lotto are showing a rapid shift from physical pokey
machines to online gambling platforms.
As this transition accelerates, the decline of pokey revenue
that is already being seen will accelerate,
and the pool of funding available
for community grants will shrink.
That trend is only going to be accelerated by such uneven
legislative playing field.
We're deeply concerned about the impact this will have,
not just on rugby, but on sport and recreation more broadly.
As we all know, times are extraordinarily tough out there
without a requirement to contribute back.
We risk losing the funding lifeline that keeps clubs afloat,
supports volunteers subsidizes participation,
and enables inclusive programs for children
and young people, women and rural communities.
We're calling for a fear of framework one that
requires online casino operators to return a minimum of 40%
of their New Zealand revenue
to community organizations in the same way
that class four operators do.
That's just not equitable.
It's essential right now, this is a pivotal moment.
We can't afford to get this wrong.
The decisions that will be made in this space will impact on
future generations of people and communities
and associated with grassroots sport.
All over New Zealand officials will no doubt tell you about
the review in three years.
I can tell you now that there will be clubs
that simply will not be here in three years,
term three in a three year term, uh, if the current drafting
of this bill is led to, uh, progress unchanged.
We're not asking for a new handout here either.
We're asking for fairness
and consistency between two classes of gambling so
that the new entrant does not cannibalize the funding stream
on which community organizations increasingly need to rely
to proceed without the requested amendment,
jeopardizes the role of sport in building stronger,
healthier communities.
And that is something not lost on over 2000 community
organizations that have taken the
time to provide submissions.
And I hope the hearing of these submissions, uh,
is not lost on the committee.
Also, thank you for the time, uh, provided today.
I'm more than happy to take any questions. Thank you.
Thank you very much, and thanks
for a really clear, um, submission.
I'm just looking around the room
to see whether are questions.
Um, I I've got one, uh, which is,
you're really clear about the 40%.
Uh, and that going back, um, one of the questions that,
that has been raised by some people is, uh, at the moment
when, when it's taken maybe from an RSA from the pokies,
it goes back into the community that the money comes from.
Do you have, um, see the best way that that money,
if it was taken online, uh, into more of a bulk fund, that
that would be distributed to make sure it was getting out?
Like you had examples in your submission,
I think from New Plymouth Palms North to Maru.
How would you see as the best mechanism to channel any, uh,
community funding that came out of online gambling?
Uh, well, you're right.
It's not as clear cut, uh, in terms of on land.
Um, we certainly haven't formed,
um, a view on that.
But I think the fact
that you're asking the question indicates a, a willingness
to want to maybe co-design an approach as, as to how
national sporting organizations might input into what
that model, um, could look like.
But it's, it's not something we've turned
a huge amount of time to at this stage.
That's okay. And, uh, lemon,
Uh, thank you for your written and oral submission.
You talked about a fairer framework.
I was just wondering if you had any ideas in terms
of the community funding, uh, 40% allocation.
Well, I guess that goes to the,
to the previous question a little bit as well.
We certainly have a clear understanding of, of
how it works at the moment as it regards to class four,
because of the direct, um, line through to the communities.
Um, I think the fear of fund framework we're referring
to is the, the fact that we'd see online ga gambling, um,
being directly comparable in terms of the regulations is
what Class four is dealing with at the moment.
The subsequent distributions into our stakeholder groups,
um, would be something that we would obviously wanna take up
as a, as a further conversation.
Thank you. Oh, thank you so much
for joining us, um, online today.
We really appreciate it.
And, um, yeah, wish you all the best. Thank you. Thank
You. Thank you
Wellington Free.
My favorite of all ambulance providers.
Oh, given you cover the region
I come from. You must be, you
must come from Wellington yourself.
Yep. Yep. Company Coast. You've
Got a great up there.
Um, hey, welcome. Uh, there'll be 10 minutes for this.
I'll let you know when there's a minute to run. Sure.
Um, you can take the written submission as read, but
otherwise the, the floor is yours
and you might like to leave time for questions at the end.
Absolutely. Well, I'd just like to say thank you very much
the committee for having us here today to be part of this.
Um, obviously we are hearing from a lot of, uh,
sports organizations, which is amazing.
Um, ours is obviously, uh, Wellington Free ambulance, uh,
focus on the free for obvious reasons.
Um, have you used our services at all?
I haven't think has anyone in
This room fa close family friends?
Yeah, so obviously we are, uh,
and obviously we're big to parliament with, uh, you know,
even from outsiders coming in.
It doesn't matter what part of the country you're born in
or where you live at the moment,
the service is completely free.
We are the only free ambulance service in New Zealand, uh,
the only one in Wellton and the wire rapper.
Uh, and despite, um, government funding, we still need
to raise at the moment at least eight
and a half million dollars per year, which
for a regional charity is a huge, uh, amount of money.
Um, we are very concerned, um,
that unlike Class four gambling,
that we have no requirement in the current bill
for online gambling operators
to return any profits to the community.
This is a significant shift from New Zealand's long
standing approach to gambling.
One that says, if gambling is to exist,
it should at least do some good.
Our fear, our fear is simple.
If online casino gambling is legalized without requiring
community contributions, it will pull away
from the Class four sector.
The result will equal less funding available
for the very organizations like ourselves
that are on the frontline helping people every single day.
Uh, and I was hoping to be able
to put this up on the big screen,
but as you can see when we say every single day, uh,
for a regional charity, we were responded
to nearly 56,000 incidences across Wellington
and wire wrap in the past year.
Um, that is just our emergency ambulance service
that does not, uh,
take into account the other services that we provide.
Um, that works out on average
a hundred fifty two one one one incidences per day.
Um, and obviously that is a large, significant number one
where it's not as simple as just, uh,
the ambulance turning up.
It starts when that one one one call comes in.
Uh, we have professional call takers
who will field that call.
Um, they will triage that call.
We have, we are changing, uh,
the way we do things all the time.
We have paramedics in that call center.
Um, and, uh, obviously then it goes down to, uh,
responds onto the ambulance being, uh, sent out to
where it is required.
Uh, just to give you guys an, uh, an indication of the sort
of cost that are involved and average call out actually
costs us $650.
That's an average. So obviously
that can go up significantly depending on the, uh,
severity of the situation.
Um, that obviously requires a lot of, uh,
large fleet of ambulances.
And I noticed you said when you said it from capi, um, just
as an example, one ambulance just arrived, uh,
at our station in Thornton today, uh, that I will,
once it's being, uh, blessed
and put into service, will go to Capital Coast.
That was 100% funded by Pub Charity, um,
that, you know, and those things are not cheap.
That's $290,000 from ordering the chassis
to getting it built and putting it out into service.
Um, uh, we have about a a, we have about 52, uh,
ambulances in our fleet,
and it costs us $65,000 on average a month
to just restock those ambulances.
Um, with consumables,
we've already seen a drop in class four revenue over time.
By 2024, it it'd fallen into just 72% of
what it was in 2011.
And if funding drops further, we're genuinely at risk
of not being able to upgrade our ambulance feet,
which we are heavily doing at the moment.
Invest in better medical tools and equipment,
or complete ES essential station upgrades, station upgrades
that will help, uh, provide a, a comfort
and protection for our staff as, as well as everyone
that we serve in the community.
Uh, we are literally here for everyone.
Um, we do not discriminate on any grounds, um,
as the 56,000 call outs will tell you.
Um, we are working all the time in regards to health equity,
uh, and we basically cannot do
that without the funding that we receive.
Since I've been doing this job, uh,
for about three years now, um,
class four gaming trusts have basically given us nearly
$2 million.
Uh, that is a significant amount.
Uh, we cannot fund our new fleet, uh,
alone in the past few months.
We've not only put a new ambulances on the road,
we've put patient transfer cars on the road,
which are transporting patients non-critical, uh, and
or urgent patients between hospital appointments,
care homes, um, hospices, all those kinds of things.
Uh, we have specialist vehicles
that we now need to put on this road.
Uh, one in regards to a major incident support vehicle.
Uh, and another one,
which is a complex patient ambulance vehicle.
Um, in regards to a lot of bariatric patients, uh,
these will all be applied to, to gaming trust
or class four gaming trusts.
Uh, we need those funds and they cannot go anywhere.
Put plainly, we, the lives we save tomorrow could depend on
the decisions that yourselves here in parliament make today.
Um, anyone that has been to Yra recently will have noticed
that with, there's a brand new, uh, ambulance station
that was opened in the last couple of weeks, uh,
that did not come cheap.
Uh, eight and a half million dollars
it cost to, to build that.
Uh, and that will now become the backup
to our Thornton station.
If touch wood, that earthquake
or whatever ha net does happen, all our, uh,
operational center will transfer directly to that.
It's a critical part of the service that we provide.
Uh, to give you an example, out of that eight
and a half million, uh, about 500,000 of
that came from class four gaming trusts.
It is a critical, critical part of what we do.
Uh, we are only original charity,
but I've said with the amounts that we, uh, have
to fundraise every day, every year, you know,
those places are very critical.
Those venues are very critical.
The relationships we have them are very, very critical.
Um, and at the end of the day, if we can't make up those,
uh, eight and a half million dollars, there's one main door
that will be coming knocking on, uh,
to get our funding from 82% to a hundred percent.
Um, you know, and I only need to remind parliament
of a couple of years ago
what will happen out there on those front steps.
And in those, on, on those lawns, uh, behind the police
was another liner of defense,
and they were people in green wearing the same badge
as myself, putting themselves on the front line
at no cost to anyone.
Um, we cannot live without this funding,
and we desperately ask you
to reconsider everything that's been in the bill.
Thank you very much your time, and
I'm open up for questions.
Thank you. And, uh, um, fantastic submission, really clear
and really just want
to acknowledge upfront the work that you and your team do.
I've been to the, and Johnsonville stations,
you've got incredible people
that serve our community so well.
So thank you. Um, can, can I ask, um,
like one of the outcomes some people have advocated
for is just, just hand it all together,
don't have online gambling, don't have any income that comes
with it because we think it takes money
from people that can't afford it.
Where do you see the balance?
Obviously you need sources of income to make up that, that
that fundraising gap.
Do you have a view on, actually we think gambling's.
Okay, as long as we can channel the money into community
good, or, you know, what if what, what if we went
to the extreme that some people have seen
and banded altogether, but there was
also therefore no income. Do you, do you have a view?
Um, I mean, we don't, I don't have access to that kind
of data that would relate to that.
Um, obviously there is a harm that comes with gambling, uh,
but I would refer to my, uh, on a gentleman here who,
who said there was no direct correlation, um,
between a rise in gangs, violence, anything like
that in regards to, or just the health and,
and then to what we have to go to every day.
Mm-hmm. Um, we would definitely rely on those experts
to give us that advice.
Um, so at the moment with the, with the information
that we have, obviously on the funding side,
we desperately need it.
Um, and with
and with anything, I mean, you know,
if we're talking about gambling,
then it opens up the conversation about, you know,
alcohol, smoking.
I mean, where does it stop really if we're talking about
harm, the kind of, you know, jobs
and the harm that we see every day.
Yeah, that's a really good point. Thank you.
Oh, well thank you for your time. Thank you.
Thanks for that. That's excellent submission
and yeah, pass our best wishes to
You. Thank you very much to everyone.
Thank you. Thank you. Our next submission is
gonna be, uh, online.
I, hopefully we have New Zealand writing for the decision,
so we'll just give, um, Donna
and anyone else time to time to join.
Welcome. Uh, thanks for coming in.
Is it Donna, you just need to unmute yourself.
Fantastic. Um, you've got some members you can see here,
some that you can't see some online,
but, uh, you have got 10 minutes for this submission.
You might like to allow some time at the end
for questions within that 10 minutes.
Um, but I'll let you know when there's a minute to run
and got your, um, submission already that we've all read.
So it's all yours.
That's it. Thank you. And thank you
for hearing me today and having me here.
I've got a small, um, slideshow that I'd like to show,
so hopefully I can share my screen
and then I'll take some questions at the end.
Okay. I just have
to see if you're able to share it.
It will pop up in a minute, but feel free
to start speaking while we wait.
Okay. Uh, so I'm with writing for the disabled
and yeah, I've come to present today
because of the significant impact, the bill
and the removal of the community, um,
gaming contribution
and the impact it has on us, uh,
as the disability support service
that we provide in the community.
Um, and what that looks like for us, um,
which is obviously quite significant.
Um, I'll just share screen.
Oh yes, here we are. Right? Everyone can see that?
Okay. Yes. Okay. So this is who we are.
We New Zealand Writing for the Disabled.
Our vision is to reach more riders
and change more lives across the whole country.
So 2024, we reached over 3000 riders, uh,
just under 3000 volunteers, 400 horses
and 1.1 million piles of poo.
We are not plane rides in paddocks.
The walk of the horse, it replicates the three planes
of movement of a human walk
and the horse moves the body a hundred beats per minute.
So it challenges and rides, uh,
moves the rider's body significant so significantly.
This encouraged core strength, balance,
and, uh, confidence to name just a few.
So our writers, what happens in the arena translates
outside into their everyday lives and into their communities
and benefits, not just themselves,
but their immediate families, their wider communities,
their schools, and their hanau.
There's some quotes from some parents
and some teachers around the impacts of writing the stuff
that people don't really think about,
about the bigger picture, about
what we do across New Zealand every day.
Um, developing head
and neck control that they can join their family at the
dinner table, developing core balance
so they can join their kids, uh, their brothers and sisters
and their peers at the bike park.
There's so much more than just the face value of what riding
for the disabled contributes.
So the reality is
RDA in New Zealand relies on class four funding.
We've got over 3000 disabled riders, 400 horses,
and our mission is to provide an accessible therapeutic
horse riding program across New Zealand.
We're in New Zealand's premier
therapeutic horse riding provider.
We operate from to in Cargill.
We've got 48 independent groups
who are all independently audited
to make sure they meet the highest legal
and internal N-Z-R-D-A policies.
All our coaches are qualified.
All our volunteers must be trained.
Every rider deserves excellence
and we ensure that they get it.
But the reality is the cost $7.8 million
to run RDA across New Zealand.
That's the national office.
In our 48 affiliated groups,
we receive 45,000 per annum government funding.
That's it. Um, we rely on class fours.
Uh, $1.2 million of class four funding.
Last year was critical to keeping our doors open.
We raised 5.2 million through grants,
donations and fundraising.
A significant chunk
of our $7.8 million operating costs without class four.
That's a $1.2 million hole
that we just simply cannot fill elsewhere.
Having value of what we deliver, our horses are maintained
to the highest welfare standards
and anyone that owns horses knows the high cost
associated with that.
The value our volunteers put in every day, every week,
every year contributes $5.4 million.
And its proven therapy costs a hundred
and something dollars to go to a physio
or occupational therapist in New Zealand
or different therapy providers.
Our service is much more accessible and cheaper
because we have the ability
to subsidize it through this funding.
We receive, we pay our wages to our coaches,
they deserve career paths
and it improves our sustainability.
So the stakes are high.
One in six, new Zealanders identify as disabled.
11% of our young New Zealanders have a disability.
Studies across New Zealand show
that they're already facing disadvantage in many sectors.
Many struggle to access therapy, especially those
with current disability funding restrictions
where accessible and our demand outstrips our
supply bottom.
The bottom line is Class four funding doesn't just support
our operations.
It removes barriers for families who need us the most.
Our fees are heavily subsidized.
It costs $160 to put one bum in one settle for one ride.
None of our groups charge that amount.
The most we would charge would be $32 of that 160.
The rest is subsidized through the fundraising grants
and other opportunities we provide.
If we cut class four funding,
you're not just cutting our income.
You are cutting hope.
Mm-hmm. I thought hopefully just save this video
from some of our service users.
Mm,
thank you.
I just like to reiterate, you know, the stark reality is
that writing for the disabled relies on class four funds
to cover our basic off operating costs would be rather not
be dependent on one source of funding
or, you know, pokey funding.
Of course we wouldn't, but we just have no
other alternative.
The removal of the community supports provision within the
online gambling coupled with the forecast of decline
of location-based pokies puts our entire operation at risk
and the disabled community just cannot afford that.
But thank you. And I can take questions.
Thank you. We do have one minute left.
That was a really, um, powerful video to show the great work
that your organization does.
Um, Tom Rutherford.
Thank you Mr. Chair. And thank you
Donna for that submission.
Donna question around, uh,
taking away class four funding.
I've, you know, read the many submissions people have made
around their concerns about no return to the community
through the online gambling.
And, um, I understand that those concerns,
I share similar concerns,
but does the legislation actually have anything
that says it's taking away class four funding?
Can you just clarify that for me, please?
No, it doesn't, but they are predicting
with the online gambling over time,
there will be a decrease in class fours.
So it's kind of a bit of a double
whammy, I suppose, going forward.
Yeah, no, I understand.
I'm just trying to make sure I've got my clarity right.
Yeah. 'cause I think it's important for us
around understanding about the return
to the community even from online gambling.
That's really important. But yeah,
I I just wanna make sure there's nothing in the legislation
that says we're gonna stop class four funding
or the way it works at present. Is that right? Right.
Correct. Yeah. Okay. Thank you.
Thank thanks Tom. And we are actually outta time
there, but thank you Donna.
Um, fantastic. Uh, we appreciate your time. We are now.
Thank you very much. Of course.
We are now gonna move to, uh,
Hugh Kettle from the water waterside ri A FC.
We'll just give a minute for the team
to switch the tech over.
And, and Hugh, if you, if you can hear us,
just accept the request to get upgraded to a panelist
and, uh
oh.
Fantastic. Well welcome.
There's 10 minutes for your, uh, submission.
You might like to leave some time for questions.
We'll take your written one as as read
and I'll let you know when there's a
minute to run all yours.
Thank you all, and, um, thanks for having me speak to you.
I'm not sure that I'll take the full 10 minutes,
but I wanted to have the opportunity to speak
because I think it is important that you,
that you hear from us all.
Um, so what Waterside Kaori,
I'm the chair of the executive committee.
The, the football club has been going for 125 years or so.
It's one of the largest clubs in Wellington.
Um, we are one of the very few
to be playing from three year olds up into both men's
and Women's Central League and occasionally National League.
So we, we run from juniors through to Elite.
We've got close to a thousand members in terms
of the impact of Class four funding on our operation.
And you know, I I just heard the submissions from RDA,
which I thought were, were really compelling.
We are in the same boat as, you know, dozens, hundreds of,
um, boarding
and community organizations where we are, we are calibrated
as such that we are reliant on this funding.
I mean the, we put few numbers.
I mean, our annual revenue now is, um,
between 500,700 50,000.
Um, we get probably 30 to 40% of our revenue from, um,
grant funding applications.
It's always a difficult process
because you can of course never guarantee it.
We, we apply regularly to a bunch of, um,
both regular and one-off supporters within
the, within the grant sector.
We almost inevitably get scaled
because of course there are more people applying
for funding than there are.
Um, there are funds to meet it, which is absolutely fine,
but it means it's, it's a,
it's always a challenging task at the best of times
to use this within our annual budget.
Our budget, if, if we've got, for argument's sake,
if we budget $500,000 of revenue,
we'll be budgeting $499,000 of costs.
Our job is to put everything we earn back into the community
and just keep a small buffer for a rainy day.
Um, if, you know, for example,
our grant funding is, is lower than it is.
We've got a couple of key sponsors,
but in, you know, in round terms
that they're not a six figure number between them.
The rest of our revenue is largely made up
of subs from our players.
We are charging juniors
and youth, so I don't know, call it five to 15 year olds,
although it's a bit broader than that, a approximately $200
a year in subscription fees.
Um, we're charging senior teams about $4,000 per team.
These largely go to fixed costs.
Then we don't make any profit, so to speak, off, off the,
um, off the subs.
Most of it goes up the, up the funnel to nz football,
capital football, ground higher, you know, it's, it's,
it's all, um, all goes around the cycle.
We simply cannot double our subscription fees for
5-year-old little Johnny
and say, Hey parents, it's gonna cost 400 bucks a year
for little Johnny to play football down
at Cory Park on a Saturday morning.
It, I, I would say, I wouldn't be exaggerating to say
that it's an existential problem.
We, it's not like we would lose 10% of our players
or 20% of our players.
We would be literally decimated, um, if we had to,
you know, if we lost grant funding entirely in, in terms of,
uh, what, um, Mr.
Rutherford had to say about the, the impact, I think the,
the point really and, you know, it's,
it's not legislating against Class four funding,
but what it is inevitably going
to do is cannibalize that pool.
And it's a pool that all
of us in the sector have got mixed feelings about having
as a really key source of our, our revenue.
But the fact you know, we all know the, the harm
that this type of gambling creates,
but fundamentally having
that money funneled back into the community, um,
is the best way that it can be used
to mitigate the harm that it does.
We know that it's consistent with the government's sort of,
um, focus on health and wellbeing.
We, we know that a dollar spent on sport has got more than
$2 worth of value in terms of the bang for the buck.
I've looked at the, um, the evidence from, um,
the community sport collectively by Martin Snedden.
Uh, I understand they've already spoken to yourselves
and they've provided some evidential background for
how this has played out in, in the past
or in, in other jurisdictions that have had similar,
um, re-regulation.
I think the evidence, the, the evidence is compelling,
but also common sense sits behind it.
If people can do something
online, they're gonna do it online.
I mean, it's not gonna be a big bang
where suddenly class four funding is gone,
but it's inevitably going
to creep away from away from the sector.
What it's gonna mean is that there's
more people staying at home doing their thing, less funding
for the community funders
to dish out more competition for that funding.
So over time, people are just going to slide into a model
where they simply can't cont, you know,
there's gonna be people like us who suddenly
missed budget by 20 grand.
Do we have 20 grand retain earnings maybe
next year we miss it by 50 grand?
Um, you know, it's gonna be a very slippery slope.
I mean, when, when I saw the, when I saw this came, come
through, I genuinely thought
that this was just an unintended
consequence of the legislation.
Because what I'm not arguing about the policy
of the legislation or,
or the regulation of online providers,
what I'm really worried about is the, the inclusion
of an equivalency type provision in if you,
if you provide these online licenses, then we want
to be in a position where we're sort of no worse off.
Ideally, we should be better off. I mean, tax taxing.
It's no substitute.
We get zero central government support
and we're not really asking for it other than this.
Um, you know, other than keeping this pot
of cash available for us.
Gotcha. Um, we, we, we, we just think
that if, if, if this one, if this continues in its current
form, it's obviously gonna have dramatic impacts.
One way of mitigating it is not to do it.
Another way of mitigating it is create some level
of an equivalency where an equivalent pool
of cash is ring-fenced and able to be, um, applied for
and dished out to the organization such as ours
who are highly reliant on it.
Um, that's probably all I have to say.
Um, directly, I mean, this, this is, I'm not exaggerating
by saying that this is a really material challenge for us,
and, um, yeah, I'd be happy
to answer any questions. No, that's great.
We've got about two minutes
for questions, Tom run Ranford.
Thanks, Mr. Chair.
And thank you, Hugh, for your submission.
Just reading on the second page of your submission, Hugh,
you talk about, uh, a practical level of how this change
for the online casino gambling funds could be distributed.
Can you just, uh, talk about that a little bit more
and how you see that as working?
How do you think, uh, the funds collected
through online casino could be distributed to the community?
Sort of similar to what happens now for those that are taken
through pokey machines in person?
Well, I guess I'm, I'm probably making up a structure
that doesn't currently exist either, um,
in the legislation or in practice.
But you could quite easily, well, I say quite easily,
you could replicate the community funding structure by way
of either a trust or some form of centrally mandated body
that actually had, um, this type of money
and created the equivalency.
So, for example, for argument's sake, you could have the,
the class four revenue stays on one side
and as, as managed as it currently is, you manage
that on a long term basis to ideally go up
with inflation rather than down.
And the balance just goes into a separately funded a,
a separately managed pot via, via, you know,
appointed trustees or something like that.
So I think, and, and we would all apply into
that separate pot as well, uh, similar
to our Class four funding.
And do you think the proportion should be the same
for those received through class four versus those received
through online gambling?
Look, I think from a club perspective
and from a sector perspective, generally, we just don't want
to see the plot available diminish.
We would love to see it increase.
We think, you know, because of the bang
for the bucket would be be, I would rather it went up, um,
or was at least index linked.
So we weren't, you know, every year we, we face inflation.
I'm not sure that the, and
that probably has a negative effect on people's gambling.
So, you know, the two
lines are going in opposite directions.
I'd rather, I'd rather see ours going
upwards along with our costs.
Thank you. Thank you. Last minute. Um, limo.
Lydia Sini. Thank
You. And thank you for your
written and oral submission.
I just wanted to ask a separate question.
Do you have a figure around licenses?
'cause in the bill it's up to 15 licenses.
Do you, would you have a figure of what you think in terms
of licenses or a number?
Not, not really. I mean, for us it's all about the,
it's about the revenue and about ensuring that some
of it's ring-fenced to go back into the community.
If, if, if you proceed that way, I mean,
the lower the number, the easier it will be
to focus on the individuals, the harder it will be
for individuals to try and game the system.
Um, so I think low would be better than higher.
Thank you. Thank you very much for your time.
I appreciate you joining us, um, Hugh,
and we are going to move on
to our next submission now from DataWorks.
Thanks all. Um, just wait for them to get
brought into the room.
We can definitely hear Al can you hear us?
Yes. Can you hear me? Can you see me?
I, I can't see you, but we can hear you.
So, um, but that's okay.
In the interest of time, we might keep going.
There's 10 minutes you can take.
Yep, no problem. Oh, there you are.
Um, take your submission as, as red, leave some time
for questions and we'll let you
know when there's a minute to run.
Okay. Thanks very much for, for having me today.
I'd like to thank the members of, of the, uh, committee for,
for, uh, for meeting with us.
Uh, my name is Al Watson.
I'm the CEO of a company called DataWorks.
Um, we operate, uh, a system called best off on behalf
of the Australian Communications
and Media Authority here in Australia.
Uh, desktop is a centralized self-exclusion system,
and currently that, uh,
system operates across the Australian iGaming industry.
Um, and we carry around 150 integrations
with operators today.
Um, obviously Australia's, uh, uh, one
of the largest iGaming markets in the world.
Um, we believe that, uh, that, uh,
that New Zealand has an opportunity to capitalize on some
of the benefits and the learnings from, from, uh, from
what we've learned here in Australia.
And, uh, and to introduce similar system, um, as the, um,
as the online casino bill is, uh, continues to, to proceed.
Um, and so I'd like to sort of, uh, go through
what CSE is and what the benefits are.
Uh, quite simply, um, uh, a CSC system
or a centralized self-exclusion system is a single
government system that allows, uh, an individual
to exclude themselves for a period of time
of their choice from all licensed operators in
a particular jurisdiction.
That's pretty much all it is at a very, very simple level.
Um, it's very, very important for me to communicate
that the, the critical thing about these systems are
that they work, um, in the iGaming context.
These are, these are very, very effective systems.
Uh, when I say that they work, um, I I mean
that they work in, in all contexts.
So from the perspective of the industry, um,
what we've seen is that, um, that here in, in Australia,
the, um, the, the gross gaming revenue performance since
2020, um, has proceeded at
around a 12% compounds annual growth rate since, uh,
since 2020 to today, best still launched in 2023.
And there's been no evidence of any kind of a,
of a slowdown of that growth.
Um, from the perspective of the, of the industry also, um,
there's no evidence that these systems, um, introduce or,
or, um, or encourage the formation of, of an illegal market.
In fact, the channelization rates in, in jurisdictions
that operate CSE systems are typically very, very high,
in fact, much higher than those jurisdictions
that don't have such systems.
But most importantly, from the player's perspective, um,
A CSE system is a very,
very effective harm minimization measure in these,
in these fast growth markets that, uh,
that really operate under a very different dynamic
than traditional gaming.
Um, we know that in, uh, in the uk for example, um, 82%
of users reported, uh, reduced gambling related harms
for the period of their exclusion.
And there is research to suggest the longer the period
of exclusion, the more effective the behavioral changes are
that, uh, that, that, um,
that can get people into trouble from the first place.
So the point that I'm trying to make is
that they're effective from the perspective of the industry,
from the perspective of the government looking
at, uh, at tax revenue.
And they're certainly effective
as a public health measure as well.
Um, one critical point to make is that, um, in contrast
to traditional systems and indeed the systems
that may be under consideration in New Zealand, where the,
whether where the industry may wish to exchange lists
of self excluded, uh, players in between themselves, um,
CSE systems are extremely, uh,
effective from a cybersecurity point of view.
So our systems or CSE systems only ever return a true force
to the, to the various operators across
the, uh, across the industry.
And they do so instantly in contrast
with traditional systems where lists
of people's PII are typically sent across
to multiple different operators, very,
very insecure, vulnerable.
And I would hesitate to say, uh, please,
please do not consider that pathway, um, from the point
of view, from of the technology and, and the cost.
Uh, it's also important to note
that New Zealand would benefit from, uh,
capitalizing on existing systems.
Um, these are proven, they're mature, they've iterated
through several cycles, um,
and from a technology perspective, they're already built.
So the availability of of world-class systems
for New Zealand, uh, is, uh, is there, um, and, uh,
and very, very close to home.
Um, I would also urge that, um, that this, uh, that CSE,
if it, if it is something of, of interest to,
to New Zealand, um,
is deployed on day one of market opening.
We have seen in multiple jurisdictions around the world
that markets open and,
and, uh, there's a fantastic adoption rate and,
and tax receipts go through the roof and, and,
and all those things are good,
but the community harms begin to really accelerate at a,
at a very swift pace.
So what we've learned and
and what we advise all jurisdictions to do, uh,
wherever we we can, is to ensure that that CSC
or harm minimizations, uh,
harm minimization measures are in place on the same day
that the market launches that way.
Um, uh, obviously
that will protect the vulnerable individuals that are,
that are in the community, but also give the industry social
license to grow effectively, um,
and in line with community expectations.
So our recommendation to the select committee is that, um,
that a government appointed independent provider be source
to operate and, and build the, the, uh, CSE system
for New Zealand, um,
that all licensed operators are encouraged to integrate or,
or, or required to integrate with that register, meaning
that all new player registrations all play a logins
are checked against it.
And that would include promotional materials to, to, uh,
to email lists of, uh, marketing lists of, of, uh, of,
of players within each one of those operators, um,
that individuals
and players within New Zealand are given the option
to self exclude for three months, uh, for a series
of periods up to life, depending on, on further research.
And that the system itself is funded
through the existing New Zealand gambling levy.
So our view is that this is an important piece
of public infrastructure and that, uh,
and that is as New Zealand progresses towards opening its
market, it's, uh, it, it designs in a future proof and,
and world leading solution.
Um, and I'll pause there and, uh, and, and,
and close my, close my opening arguments. Thank you.
Thank you. And I'll go first to, um,
Benjamin Doyle and then LA moment.
Well done. Can you hear me all right?
Yes. Hi, KA kilda. Thank you so much.
That was a really, um, useful explanation.
Um, we've heard previously already about self-exclusion
and the importance of that
as a mechanism for harm reduction.
Um, I'm really interested
to know more about why centralized self-exclusion, um,
in your view, may be better than, um,
self-exclusion mechanisms built into each
of the online gambling platforms or, um, organizations
or businesses, um, that would require the user to go to each
of them independently and self exclude.
It's absolutely essential
that these systems are designed from the
perspective of the player.
So these are vulnerable individuals.
And, um, and, you know, in a, in a very dark moment,
if you think about what happens during a, a moment
of self-exclusion, that's usually a, uh,
an extremely severe situation that a person is dealing with.
Um, it is, uh, it is probably inappropriate
to expect an individual that's hit that, uh, moment
to then go and self excl exclude from multiple
different operator sites.
Um, obviously in the casino, you can go up to the front desk
and do it once, but in an iGaming market where there's 15
or more licensed operators, um, it it,
it's just not gonna be a functioning thing.
We've seen that in multiple jurisdictions,
but it doesn't stop, stop there.
Um, it's also important that there is a very,
very simple low friction, uh, process for enrollment, um,
designed with reference to those people
with lived experience such that, um, the, um, the moment
that that person has,
has faced might be two o'clock in the morning, um,
they can easily and quickly hit one single channel and,
and know that they're then excluded for a,
for a complete period that they,
that they set for themselves.
Um, so very, very important from a player experience.
That's the first place I'll start. Then.
I think it's, it's really important
to think about this in the context of the broader, uh,
consumer health, uh, policies that might be
of interest within New Zealand.
So, um, yes, um, having, uh, a system like this, um,
certainly will allow regulators to ensure compliance and,
and, and deliver to very specific
harm minimization outcomes.
But they also generate data that can be used
to understand what's happening in the market itself.
And actually, ideally, the best possible outcome would be
that measures are put in place such that, um, citizens
and players never feel
that they reach the point of self-exclusion.
That we understand enough about the dynamic in the market
that interventions are possible, um,
without obviously compromising people's privacy.
Um, so look, from my perspective, I think there's,
I could probably talk all day about why CSE is better
than a distributed system.
I've already talked about the cybersecurity threats
of the alternative systems, whereby lists
of people's names are sent through the market.
That's extremely dangerous.
And, and, and certainly, um, I would not recommend, uh,
any such system, uh,
anywhere in the world, let alone in New Zealand.
Thank you very much. Uh,
Uh, thank you for your, uh, presentation,
both written and oral.
Just very quickly, the self-exclusion system, um,
how much support, so support a,
a person can self exclude themself,
but then from on in what kind of support, um,
is, could be provided?
Yeah, that's an excellent question. Thank you.
It, it's very important that these systems are
coupled with other therapies.
So self-exclusion is, is not a therapy in itself.
It's simply one part of a broader, uh, of a,
of a broader set of therapies that are needed
to help change, uh, you know, a, a, a person's behaviors.
Um, and so, uh, the way that we deploy that, uh,
here in Australia is, is through, uh,
a multiple, multiple different methods.
The first one is through the enrollment process
where a player can elect to have a support person to, um,
to, to join with them for the period of their exclusion.
And that individual helps them as they come on
and off the really key moments of that exclusion period,
particularly near the end of that exclusion period,
or if they want to, um, come from
that exclusion period early.
Um, we couple, uh,
and partner with organizations that have, uh, you know,
other more formal therapies, um,
including psychological support.
Uh, very, very important in in, in this context.
Um, and I think that it's also, uh, important to note
that these systems need to operate, um, within a broader set
of public health measures.
They can't be seen as the, as the answer.
So post-deployment, um, they're very, very important
that there is a, is a contact center that can be called
for those people that might be in crisis and need support.
Um, they need to be able to talk
to an individual when they're hitting that very dark moment
and, and perhaps other, um, channels not available to them.
So, um, so it's not a, a one-stop shop, um,
of just having one system to, to automate,
uh, the, this, this measure.
Um, this is one part of, of, of several important, um,
components when it comes to harm immunization policy.
Thank you. Thank you very much for your time.
We, we are out of, uh, time there,
but, um, appreciate your, uh, submission today
and your, um, very, uh, extensive written,
which we'll follow up with as well.
Thank you. Um,
and now we have allowed just enough time
for Paralympics New Zealand, so we'll let uh,
them get promoted.
Oh, welcome. That was quick. Sure.
Um, Kiara, you, we've got 10 minutes set aside for you.
Um, and so we've
Got one more person to join.
Greg Warner is, I think he's,
I think Greg's just coming through.
So look, you can take your written submission as read,
allow a bit of time for questions.
I'll let you know when there's a minute
to run and the time's yours.
Fabulous. Um, thank you. So you've got Jane Gurney, chair
of Paralympics, New Zealand, and Greg Warner, our CEO.
Um, we wanna support the sport New Zealand Chairs Forum
submission, which I'm part of with Martin Snedden,
but also specifically just
to support the PNZ submission, which you have read.
Thank you. Um,
and note our alarm at what we,
what we hope have been unintended consequences
of the bill as it stands.
The key point I wanted to make is that,
while I know some submitters believe the impacts of
CLA on class four, gambling
and funding to the community may be gradual over time,
my experience in the media sector has me concerned the
impacts could be far more immediate than this.
Um, digital consumption in most sectors obviously grew
steadily until COVID, but since then, um,
digital growth's been exponential in many areas.
And in my day job in the media,
we've seen digital advertising grow
by a hundred percent in the last decade.
Um, and growth of this kind
and online gambling is gonna have devastating impacts on
funding for community organizations,
especially in the regional sports, um, and US arts sectors.
Um, and I'll get Greg to just share a couple
of the Paralympics New Zealand examples with you,
Jayna. And thanks everyone
for, uh, welcoming us here today.
Uh, Paralympics New Zealand, we rely on a variety
of funding from different sources, uh, to be able to sort
of support our community and our education initiatives
and, um, some of our programs
that we've shared in the submission, just to bring
to life a little bit more, the Parasport Collective creates
a community for our para-athletes, our coaches
and whanau to be able to engage
and learn from each other across different
parasport and disabilities.
And this is the environment that we're working on to be able
to discover the next name, Sophie Pasco
or Cameron Leslie or Anna Grimaldi.
Uh, our education program, which provides resources
to schools across the country to teach Tamaki about the
values of the Paralympic movement of courage, determination,
inspiration, and equality.
And rather than Jana and I try
and explain to you the impact,
what we thought we'd do is share with you one
of the videos from our education program,
which I'll work out how to share with you now,
and hopefully the sound will work.
Now, hopefully you guys could hear that.
'cause I couldn't,
We, we had the subtitles, but that's
With all of it, right?
Um, and clearly we just wanted to share that.
'cause that's an example of, you know, that's not one
of the core things that we do,
which involves obviously sending the teams
to the Paralympic games,
but it shows the kind of social change elements
that we're able to do with things that we get
with additional funding, um,
and one of the sort of programs
that would potentially be at risk.
But that's all we've got,
and we'd really happy to take any questions from you.
Thank you very much, um, appreciate your submission and,
and all that you guys do.
My question is, uh, I think we've heard from a lot
of people about your, your first one,
which is the high level purpose, the second one,
which was the detailed mechanism.
So there's, um, uh, I wonder if you have a view on
how is the best way to achieve achieve that sort
of equity across, you know, big organizations, small,
you know, provincial, urban, uh,
is it just channel it all into somewhere?
Like, for example, one idea we heard was a lottery, the,
the lottery board.
Is it where they have their fund
that go all the process from lotto go out?
Or is it something different?
Do you, do you have an idea of
what you, what you would suggest?
Greg, do you wanna take that? Yeah,
Yeah, thanks. We, I
mean, we, we included in our submission that we think
that the strengths of the current class four models are a
really useful starting point.
And I think from our perspective, if there's an opportunity
to be able to create a similar sort of model, uh,
that currently exists that was able to then distribute it,
we think that that fairly distributes money at the moment
or has an equal opportunity for people to be able to apply
for and being able to create, whether that's a single trust,
uh, or multiple trust that again, we could, I guess,
duplicate the same type of, of effort that we're currently,
uh, utilizing to be able
to apply for similar sort of funding.
Thank you. Um, there, there are, don't seem
to be any questions, and we're just coming up on time.
So, uh, appreciate you joining us today
and wish you guys all the best
and all the work you're doing, not just with our current,
um, para athletes, but those up, up
and coming ones we saw on the video.
Thank you so much. Thank you guys.
Um, the meeting is scheduled just
to suspend now until three 15.
So, um, colleagues, I'll join you back here just
before
3 15, 14
and a half.
And if you bring, um, Darrel on
and then we'll be ready to start being on.
And we should get right through all these, all 10 minute,
oh, Tom's got a little bit cold.
That's what happens up in the mount renowned for its
temperate environment.
Yeah. Expecting lots of questions
for the Taranaki Cricket Association from the
only person in the room that scored a record breaking 160
odd run in it.
Well, um, I members, Ms. Will, uh, start again and welcome.
We're gonna welcome first of all Jar Hall, uh,
to speak on behalf of the Chile Children's Center.
I apologize if I pronounce that wrong.
Um, you can correct me your,
there is 10 minutes for your submission.
Um, take your, uh, your written one as read,
maybe leave some time for questions.
I'll let you know when there's a minute to go.
Otherwise, all yours.
Uh, and thank you for the opportunity to submit.
I'm Darryl Hall, the general manager of Chumley
and a former Chumley child myself.
We have an oddly pronounced name.
We will blame the Norman French who came over
to England in the 11th century.
It's all their fault. Mm-hmm.
Um, so we're a Canterbury Charitable Trust.
We provide free short-term plan
and emergency respite care
for children aged five to 12 throughout Canterbury.
And we're provided this service for a Century.
Children stay at Chumley in times of family stress, a crisis
when they need to have some time away from the home.
And there is no other support available.
We're 80% privately funded by trusts, business
and people at Canterbury and some nationally.
So to prepare this for this oral submission,
I looked at 10 other submissions from Football league
advertisers, standards Authority, athletic Rugby Business
and Professional Women Business New Zealand,
which I thought was quite a good one.
An Dunedin casinos.
After a while, I, I had to tap out,
you have a really good cross section of New Zealand society
commenting on this bill.
Perhaps reading 10 submissions might be too few,
but it did showed our submission on our narrow point
has a lot in common with other submissions,
so won't belabor it.
So in short, we think online
gambling operators should face the same incentives
as in-person gambling operators.
And the key policy issue for us is community benefit
and community involvement.
Uh, that is the subsections, G
and H of section three
of the gambling Act should apply in that case.
Thank you.
Thank you for a very clear and succinct, um, submission.
Yeah, it's really helpful during these long days, uh,
I was really interested in, uh, the second point, uh, a lot
of people have spoken about in ensuring money from
gambling benefits the community.
But your second one about ensuring, um,
that we facilitate community involvement in decisions
about the provision on gambling.
I just wonder if you could just expand on
that a little bit for us.
Yes. So I don't claim to be a policy expert in this area,
but when I started looking at this area, I could see
that part of the, of the act.
I don't know exactly how it plays out, uh, in detail,
but it seemed to me a sound, uh, purpose
of the gambling environment
that we have some community involvement, uh, along
with community funding.
So I said, well, okay, if it makes sense for, uh, operators
to try and maintain, uh, an even playing field as possible,
then let's include that in the submission.
Yeah, thank you. And that's not just about
where the money goes that is collected,
but that's the broader question of how much
and what kind of gambling should be made
available in our community.
Am I hearing that correctly?
Yeah. Well, that's a difficult policy, uh,
discussion about getting the some public good, uh, out of,
out of gambling, uh,
appreciating human nature is what it is.
So having, uh, a broad set of inputs makes sense, which is,
for example, why I try to read a few, uh, other submissions
and ones I might not normally pick up to try
and understand other people's perspectives.
So I thought it was quite useful and it caused me
to think a little bit differently, actually.
Yeah. Well, thank you. Look, that's really, um, succinct
but actually really clear, and
that's actually really helpful for this process.
So thanks for your time.
Thanks for coming, uh, joining us online today,
and we wish you, uh, all the best down in Canterbury.
I'll learn how to pronounce it properly next time.
Not a problem. Thank you. Thanks, Gerald.
I think we'll move, uh, up the country now to Taranaki
and the, uh, Taranaki Cricket Association,
and I think we have Ryan Evans joining us.
Hello. Just starting my video.
Not a problem. We can, uh, hear you loud
and clear while that comes up.
Good to see you. Um, look, there's, there's up
to 10 minutes, um, allocated for this.
We've, we've read your written submission,
so you can take that as read.
Um, you might like to leave some time for questions.
I'll let you know when there's a minute
left. The floor's yours.
Thanks very much. Um, good afternoon everybody.
Uh, just a quick apologies if
I'm looking away from the camera.
Our, uh, our office printer is on the blink, so I have
to have my notes up here on the screen beside me.
Um, that's fine. But look, uh, I'll, I'll try not
to take out too much of your time today.
Um, and as you say, take my submission as read.
Um, I just wanted to note, um, you know, it was a,
and you probably noted that it was a templated submission.
Um, but I think why I wanted to talk was, uh, just
to reiterate that, um, the use of
that doesn't undermine the seriousness, uh,
with which I took the submission.
Um, a small sports organization like ours, um,
we're just over three FTE.
We're always stretched for cash,
and as a result, uh, we are time poor.
So anywhere you can make a saving of time
or money matters, um, I just wanted to appear in front
of you though, to reiterate the importance
of the Class four funding to the ongoing, ongoing viability
of how we run our sport in our province.
Um, and I think really what concerns me is,
um, I, I suppose having to, in a tight economic climate,
having to push increased costs onto our users,
which is really the only option,
the only realistic option available to us, um, a
as class four funding decreases.
Um, so if we've gotta replace our Class four funding,
um, with user pays fees, um, in totality,
that would likely result, um, in about a hundred dollars
increase, uh, to an individual's player competition
fees each year.
Uh, given our current charges to players,
they range from roughly $11 50 for a beginning junior
through to, uh, $65 for Premier Seniors.
Um, these are TCA fees only.
They do not include other components of
what a player would pay to their club in subs.
So you can see that's a pretty significant increase, um,
at the lower end, about 150 per 150%, um,
at the higher end, um, more than 800% increase.
Um, so I'm not suggesting that, uh, I'm concerned
that the legislation will white Class four funding
out overnight.
Um, but I do think it's reasonable to conclude
that over time the legislation as proposed will lead
to increasingly reduced class four funding availability.
Um, just finally, look,
I do understand the harmful nature of gambling.
Um, but I guess in my view, online casino gambling is likely
to be even more harmful than traditional forms,
given the already addictive nature of smartphones.
Um, I do believe in appropriate regulation of gambling, um,
but I would say that at least under previous
or existing gambling legislation, uh, that harm
that is caused, uh, is offset
via proceeds channeled back into the
community through grants.
Um, these allow, these grants, they allow for good things
and positive social experiences in our community.
Um, the kind of experiences that organizations like myself,
um, other sporting
and cultural groups, um, provide to our community.
So I would just urge you to keep that in mind as you work
through the legislative process.
So thanks for your time and happy to answer any questions.
Thank you. And we'll start with Tom Rutherford.
Hey, thanks Ryan. Uh, appreciate your submission.
I'm member of one of my local cricket clubs here in Toga,
so, uh, it is close to my heart.
Uh, keen to understand, uh, I share some of the concerns
that you've got around not having the return of funding
to the community through the online gambling.
How do you think in practical terms that could be actioned
or delivered, uh, by collecting the online casino gambling
and then having it distributed
through the community funding?
Should it just replicate how class four is done already
or do you think there would be another
model that we could use?
Oh, certainly I haven't,
I I don't know about other models that you could use.
Um, but certainly the, the Class four model that we work,
um, at the moment seems to work, um, pretty well.
Um, I, I did listen to, I think it was one of the, uh,
one of the, um, alliance groups, uh, that,
that submitted earlier today.
And I thought that, you know, they raised some good points
that they're already getting themselves
active into that space.
Um, and,
and potentially just, um, yeah,
utilizing the same model, I think.
But I, I guess there'd be some pretty
difficult logistics to work through as well.
And just, uh, following up,
what do you think the flow on effects would be
if these changes weren't enacted as you requested?
Do you think you would see a decrease in players player
numbers due to the unaffordability for them to play?
Yeah, ultimately, definitely.
You know, um, man, it's, it's hard enough, um,
even running PR as cheaply as we can.
Um, and, you know, for, for little kids at the moment,
we charge them, you know, sort of $11 50 a year, um, to go
to those same little kids
and say, oh, it's gonna be $111 50,
uh, next year.
Um, I, I can imagine that being a tipping point
for, for a lot of families.
Um, we work really hard to be as affordable as we can,
and the class four funding is a really important part
of our, uh, funding mix.
Thanks, Ryan. Hey, thanks Ryan.
And thanks for all that you and,
and the association do up in, uh,
Taranaki best cricket ground in the
country. I'm just calling it now.
It's lovely. It's lovely.
No, thank you. Thanks for your time.
Thanks for your time. We're gonna move, uh,
back down South Amberley squash Rackets Club now. Uh, we
Did have them in the Zoom, I pat have just left.
Okay. Is do we have Dunum budget or anyone? Uh, we
Don't at this Stage.
No one else waiting in the meantime. No, we
Can get on the phone Soon.
Um, we'll, we'll just, um, we'll just maybe mute
and just suspend for a couple of minutes while we
just, um, get,
Thanks so much.
Bye. It's good Phone,
just,
just needs to ask unmute.
And will you just let us know when
you're happy and we'll continue.
I hear you. Um, he just needs to unmute in terms of mouth.
And that's, uh, Pans, um,
Pan, uh, if you can hear us, if you just unmute
and, uh, turn on your camera, you should be good to go.
Um, so everyone else, we are down to the, uh,
Nu Charitable Trust.
Ura, thank you for, um, stepping in at short notice.
We're really grateful. Uh, no worries.
As long as you're happy and you've had a moment
to gather your thoughts, we'd be really keen
to hear from you for up to the next 10 minutes.
There's, uh, others joining us in the room and online.
Um, we, okay. You can take your written submission as read.
We've all got that. Um, might like
to leave some time for questions.
I'll let you know when we are close to the end, but
otherwise, the time's all yours.
Oh yeah. Um, oh, hi, my name's Pani.
Um, I'm the CEO of, um,
Maui Kanu Charitable Trust.
Uh, we are based in Hastings, Hawkes Bay.
Um, I've had, um,
I've only, our trust's only been going
for probably only a few years.
Um, and we have had, um,
We have had, um, one grant that we put through and it, um,
and it was able to get across the line
and, um, it's really helped, helped a lot of, um,
we run a mixed martial arts show, um,
at our, at my gym.
And it's, um, it's a lot of our younger,
younger kids, uh, teenagers, adults,
a lot from our community.
And it's really benefited them with the, the sound system
that the grant was able to, uh, buy
and just made the show run a lot easier.
And it's helped these, these young kids, um,
with their training and their coaching, uh,
with my coaching, sorry.
And it's helped them compete.
Um, it's definitely, um,
would be a big loss to the community if, uh,
the funding was, um, went offshore overseas.
So it has really made a lot of
impact in our little community here in
Hastings, in Hawke's Bay.
Um, so we really, um, would like to see that continue,
um, however that, um, may look.
Um, so it's really, uh,
I just really wanted to say that, you know,
it has benefited a lot of people through our community.
You know, a lot of our, a lot of our, um,
families that are, um, less fortunate, um, a lot of our,
uh, our, uh, gang families that, um,
come to the gym and send their kids
and their kids, um, are able to
learn mixed martial arts
and it gives them a lot more discipline, self-control,
uh, and it gives them a lot more confidence to, um,
get out there and be part of the community.
And it gives them responsibility
that they know they've got a competition coming up.
So they, um, really put their heads down and try
and work hard to, um, keep health healthy,
um, keep active
and it's really good for their mental health, uh,
also their physical health.
So there has been so many benefits from,
although we've only received one grant, we have been open
for a few years, but we have tried maybe five or six times,
and we finally were able to get, um, one grant.
So we were really, um, grateful
and fortunate that that was able to, um,
we were able to get that grant.
It took us, you know, it took us a long time to get
that grant, but when we finally got it,
we were really happy.
Like it was, you know, we tried so many times
and we kind of got disheartened.
We were like, oh, what are we not doing right?
Um, and then when it finally came through,
we were so grateful.
Um, we were so happy that we finally, um,
got something for the community.
Um, so for me it's, it's,
it's bigger than me.
It's more about the community, the people,
the less fortunate people that, um, would
lose out from any of the funding that got stopped
that could go to the, the people.
Um, so I really, really want to urge the,
the need for, um, the funding
to still stay within our communities
and to still be able to benefit our people
that are less fortunate that, um,
that don't really have a means of, uh, maybe
getting some boxing gloves or some shin pads
or just the little things that the grants can help
supply the, um, um, our gym and stuff.
Um, so I really, really wanted to, um,
put my submissions forward
and say that I really believe that, you know, it should stay
in New Zealand and that, you know, if it does go offshore,
it would be a big loss to our communities and our people.
Um, and we really, really wanna, um,
say, please, please, can we, you know, keep things the same?
I don't know why things are going offshore,
but I'm just putting my
submissions forward
that it has helped us at our community and our gym.
And if we were to lose that little bit of help we have had,
it would be, it would be a big loss.
Um, and it, I don't know what we would do otherwise.
We would have to look for other things,
um, fundraising and stuff.
Um, so yeah, I just really wanted to, um,
put my, my thoughts forward.
Thank you. Yeah,
Thank you. Uh,
pan, that's a, a, a great submission.
I've just got a question from, uh, LA Lydia Sini.
Oh, thanks. P for your written and your oral submission.
Obviously you are really passionate about young people who,
um, have a number of challenges.
I wanted to just to quickly ask, um, in terms of,
um, social license.
So, uh, you've said,
you've mentioned in your old submission,
you've applied a number of times and you finally got it.
Um, sort of what, uh, are the numbers that have become part
of your program for Sounds like quite a few years.
Can you, can you say that question again? Sorry,
I was just asking around numbers.
So you, you said earlier that you had applied a number
of times, but finally you've received, um, some funding,
community funding, just really interested in, in numbers
of your program as it's growing,
but also the social license that you've mentioned earlier.
Well, the, we've we're on our ninth show.
We've got another show coming up on the 27th of this month,
and the show has, it started off really small,
and every show has just got better and better
and the community has just started to really get behind us
and people have come together, you know, not just, um,
our less fortunate people,
but even a lot of people that know someone fighting has came
to the show and our shows have just got better and better
and stronger and stronger.
Um, I think
because, um, there is a lot more people,
I think watching a lot more on the, uh,
fight sports and stuff.
So there's a lot more, um, kids getting involved,
even adults getting involved now.
You know, there's a lot going on on social media with,
you know, you know, for instance like Dan H****r, uh,
holding his one minute scraps and stuff.
And, you know, we're just, we're nothing like that.
We just hold a little community show,
but it's gone from strength to strength
and it's getting bigger and better,
and it's a safe environment.
We don't do any alcohol at our, at our shows.
We just, um, yeah,
no alcohol and no smoking and stuff.
Um, so it's great for the community
and it's got better and better.
The numbers are, I'd say this next show, we've got close
to 20 fights, so there'll be, I reckon there'll be close
to 400 people coming.
Um, yeah.
Thank you. Thank you so much.
We are, we're actually out of time there,
but we really appreciate you joining us today.
Thanks for your flexibility
and wish you all the best with the show later this month.
Okay guys. Um,
we, I think maybe have Dunedin budget advisory.
So Andrew's, thank you, uh, Andrew,
he's not, but we welcome.
And so we've got 10 minutes for, for your submission.
Uh, you can take your resume. One is read, um, leave,
maybe leave some time for questions
and I'll let you know when there's a minute to run.
The floor Is yours.
Uh, thank you Kiara.
Andrew Henderson, good afternoon
chair and committee.
Thank you for this opportunity to present. Today.
I'm representing Dunedin Budget Advisory Service.
Uh, our organization supports people in
or at risk of financial hardship,
and we've been operating for 53 years
in the Dunedin community.
In the last year, we've supported 303 individuals
and families, and currently we have
115 active cases on our books.
The benefits of the Dunedin Budget advisory service
to our community are numerous People
who have received our support are more likely to be able
to achieve their financial goals, be able to save
for upcoming expenses, feed themselves in their tiki
and afford their essential living costs.
They're less likely to experience the issues caused
by poverty, crime, poor mental health
and addictions, welfare dependency,
or basic health, lack of education,
and poor dietary choices.
We are very concerned
that the new online gambling license holders will not be
required to return money to our community.
My organization relies on gambling contributions, uh,
so I will use us as an example for you.
In July of last year, the Ministry
of Social Development ceased the funding
of our organization, which was no fault of our own.
There simply wasn't enough money in the budget
to support the entire New Zealand
building financial capability sector
That led my organization to host a public hui
to discuss whether our community still needed an
organization like ours.
And the answer came back as a resounding yes.
And so we've had to look at new ways to
fund our ongoing operations,
and we have become reliant on grants from the likes
of lottery grants, the pokey trusts in the Needin Casino.
If the government does not want to
or is unable to fund us, then these sources
of income are vital to keeping us open.
I was quite surprised at what I was reading when in March
of this year, I read the news that
Minister Van Velden did not want online casinos
to return money to the community
because she did not want community groups
to become dependent on grants.
Uh, from these sources.
We are reliant, and this is not likely to change
unless we're properly funded through government contracts.
40% of our income last year did come from gambling sources.
In addition, she must not be aware
that many government contracts state
that they only cover 80% of the cost to provide a service,
and that the providers are required to
find the shortfall from other sources.
These other sources are highly likely to be gambling trust
to make things even more difficult for us.
Many community funders such as, uh, community trusts
do not cover operational costs such as rent,
utilities, and wages.
Rather, they only fund new projects,
which is not very useful
to many not-for-profit community groups.
Gambling trusts are an exception to this
because they do fund operational costs such
as wages online.
Casinos will inevitably compete directly
with local gambling providers.
And so if they're not re required to return money
to the community, they'll be directly taking
more money from the not-for-profit sector.
If, which seems to be the case,
the government cannot properly fund organizations like ours,
then please require the new online gambling license holders
to return money to the community.
Uh, As an example, um, we've seen people that come
to us, um, who have gambled away their family's savings,
um, or money that was meant for paying bills.
We, we directly support these victims of harmful gambling
by negotiating with the creditors,
organizing repayment plans, accessing interest free loans,
providing advocacy,
and making referrals to appropriate supports.
In some conclusion,
there's an end budget advisory service is a very small
example of what will happen.
Not requiring online casinos to return money
to the community will cause a catastrophe in the New Zealand
not-for-profit sector.
Thank you, and I'm happy to take any questions.
Thank you for a very clear, um, submission, Andrew.
And, uh, there don't seem to be any questions,
but I think you've outlined that that desire to see, um,
money returned back to community Good.
Really clearly based on the, on the, um,
the work you're doing on the ground down there in Dunedin.
So thanks for all your organization do.
Um, we appreciate your time today. Thank
You.
We are gonna move on to our next submitter. Uh,
We don't have them yet, but we do have Auckland Rugby
Union Incorporated.
Yeah. So that will, um,
we'll bring up Auckland Rugby Union
and, uh, if Paula is with us,
you should be, uh, with us now, Paula,
if you, oh, here we are.
Yep. Just coming on. It is just reconnecting me.
Um, so yeah, thank you very much for, um,
letting me speak today.
It's, it's, it's a pleasure to have you there.
There's up to 10 minutes. Um,
you can take your written submission as read
and we'll let you know when there's sort
of a minute to run the floor's. Yours. Yep.
Perfect. Um, so as drafted, um,
Auckland Rugby doesn't support the proposed bill, um,
as it doesn't allow for community sport
as a key beneficiary, um, as other gaming legislation
and regulations do.
Um, unfortunately we do rely on this funding
as other funding sources are shrinking.
Um, and it without this funding delivery into community
sport would be severely compromised.
Um, sport isn't a luxury, it's a vital contributor
to people, um, better communities.
Um, and it contributes through youth development,
mental health and wellbeing and community cohesion.
Inevitably, we see
that the online gaming will cannibalize the existing model,
um, which does support community sport.
Um, for us, that includes
ensuring we can deliver school-based programs,
ensuring competition delivery across both our
junior and senior rugby.
It helps support community roles to support coaching,
development, referees,
governance in our clubs and training.
It also helps provide equipment
and uniforms across all the amateur teams
that we have under our umbrella.
And as a result of that funding,
we have a low cost to entry.
So we don't charge, um, affiliation fees to any
of our schools or clubs.
Um, and that is a key thing for us
that we like to be able to do.
So through that, we're making sport accessible
to our participants, our schools, and our clubs.
For us not making the change
to have online gambling contribute to community sport
would reduce our ability to accessibility
and it will increase inequality
and decrease participation through sports.
So we would like to see the bill have
a requirement to have funding back into community sport
and community organizations,
and that's, that's most of that.
So I'm happy to take questions if, if needed. Thank you
Very much. Can I, can
I ask you just one question on the third page
of your written submission?
Yep. You made three points at the bottom.
Um, other funding sources are shrinking.
You are part of the public health mission.
I I think that's a really important point.
The other one, um, number two,
you said sport is being doubly hit by the digital shift.
Can you just explain for me sort of what the, the, that,
that, that double is?
Yeah, absolutely. So when we see it, um, kids
and participants now, like, um, getting them onto a field
to actually participate
and take participate in sport is hard work.
Um, we're competing against digital games.
We are competing against that digital world
to get them off computers
and onto a field to actually want to play and participate.
So we see that as a real challenge to being able to actually
get them to participate in the real world
and have fun passing that ball around
and learning those valuable life skills
that come from sport.
Fantastic, Tom. So that, that's what we
Mean. Yeah. No, that's helpful.
Thank you Tom Rutherford.
Yeah, thank you Mr. Chair.
My question is, uh, about the non-support for the bill.
Um, if the bill was to include provisions for
online gambling to have, uh, a percentage return
to the community, would you support the bill?
Yes. Yes, it would. Okay.
So, so the only thing
that's really holding back your support
for the legislation is the return of, uh,
some funds received back into the
community from online gambling?
Absolutely. So we are reliant on class four funding.
Um, I don't think that that's a secret in any public sport.
Yeah. Um, so unless
that's funded from an alternative source from the
government, we, we just can't deliver what we deliver.
Okay. Thank you Paula. That's
Right. And one
more question from, uh, Lamon. Lydia.
Uh, thanks Chair. Just supplementary
to the chair's question.
Um, you've got in your written submission, uh,
the youth development factor, I asked a question,
the movement of from digital,
which is like the swipe generation Yeah.
To the physical, um, which is previous.
Can you sort of elaborate more on that, the, the challenges
that you face weekly in terms of why the benefit is really,
uh, sorry, the community benefit is really important.
Yeah, absolutely. So, um, I think it's really able
to be seen in the way that, um, youth actually interact
with each other and how they interact with their coaches
and referees on the field.
Um, it's, if I see, you know,
kids sitting on computers
and everything else, they're the way in which they interact
and they learn skills to be able to have teamwork,
to communicate, um, to lose gracefully.
Um, and to do all of those things.
When you're playing a computer game, you are not having
that same interaction with a bigger group where
you are learning how to take turns to
call for the ball, to celebrate the win of the team,
but also to support each other
through the loss of what that looks like.
So the, the behaviors that you see in kids is that
those who are digital are much more,
a bit more fiery, probably a little bit more
or less likely to interact in the same way and come through
and develop in the same way.
Those who are with sport who've got the discipline
and you know, they turn up every week onto that field
and they have a great time.
Okay. And so just lastly,
the community benefit is really important in the
longevity for Auckland Rugby.
Absolutely. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you very much for your time today, Paula.
We're really grateful and a really good submission.
So, um, yeah, wish you all the best.
Great. Thank you very much. We are gonna move
to our next one now
We have Yes.
I wondered if you might, so if we have, uh, worship
Tanya Tap, just give her a
minute to come online. She just
Needs to unmute Kiara.
Kiara, nice to see you again.
Um, I'm sure you know the deal,
but you've got, uh, 10 minutes
that we look forward to hearing from you.
Um, well you can take your written one
as reads least in time for questions
to let you know when there's a minute to
run. It's all yours.
Excellent. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
And it is my pleasure, uh, to be joining
as the mayor of rot.
Um, I'm representing Lakes Council.
I have support from my counselors for the written submission
and, and this one today.
And also, uh, from my community.
Um, now the community
of URA has unfortunately seen very high representation in
terms of gambling harm, uh,
but also we have higher proportion
of venues compared to the national average.
So we've got 24 class four venues, which represents 2.3, uh,
percent nationally.
So we were quite interested in,
in the proposed online casino gambling bill.
Um, we have seen the harm of gambling,
but we have also seen the benefits, especially
with the proceeds, um, going into community grants
and supporting many meaningful community groups
of which we have heard, um, make their submission as well.
Uh, so the key for our submission is we are supportive
of the bill, but we'd like to make a couple of suggestions
where we think that it could be even stronger.
So, um, part three in particular sections 38, 39
and 40, uh, could have some strengthening to ensure that,
uh, there is meaningful, uh, harm minimization
and also protection.
Um, as an example, section 39 could more clearly define
what reasonable steps operators should be taking, uh,
'cause that may be up to interpretation at the moment.
And we would like to know that, um, it is, uh,
particularly clear, especially, um, with our key concern,
which is how do we ensure
that under 18 year olds when using online, um,
and not, uh, inadvertently finding themselves, uh,
consuming advertising from gambling,
or worst case participating in gambling as well.
Um, so we did have specific concern
around the advertising on social media.
We have heard, uh, even from some influencers that come from
that people are offered hundreds of thousands of dollars
to promote online gambling, uh,
if they're a key influencer in our community.
Uh, this is really crazy.
Um, the biggest that I heard of was a payment of offer
of $500,000, which they declined based on moral basis.
Um, but it really is concerning that it will be very hard
to monitor, to track
or to control advertising that's happening on social media.
So to be very clear, this might be a reel
that's on Instagram, it might be on
TikTok, it might be on Facebook.
Uh, but I'm not sure how we will be able to monitor
that if we don't actually have control
of the platforms of which Meta does.
So, um, that would just be our suggestion to make sure
that part three section 38
and 39 of the bill does, uh,
mandate age limits and harm prevention.
But we are concerned that the social media advertising could
remain under regulated.
So, uh, just strongly suggest that, uh, we ensure stronger
and compulsory regulation around, uh,
social media in particular.
Uh, so I'll move to my next part,
which is probably the large amount of feedback
that you're receiving around protecting
and preserving community funding for local initiatives.
Um, so for those who may not be aware,
current legislation requires gaming societies
to return at least 40%
of the net proceeds back into the community
in the form of grants.
Uh, that's very significant.
Uh, we know here at URA
that are very good not-for-profit organizations.
Uh, fantastic events, uh, all funded, uh, by this.
And we understand that there is in, um, this current bill,
a proposed 12% online gambling duty
for the online operators.
So we would like to suggest through the submission
that this money is reinvested into solving problem
gambling locally, but we also believe that it is critical
that our communities, um,
where this is the gambling is occurring, has access
to funding available to them, especially
for our community groups.
And we do believe that it's only right where possible
that profits generated from gambling are reinvested back
into their local communities.
Uh, which is why we are strongly pushing, knowing that
as a rural and provincial area, we still have unfortunately,
uh, very high stats in terms of gambling harm.
Uh, but we also have great organizations that rely on, uh,
the funding, certainly from the, uh, class four venues,
uh, which are those in person,
and we imagine that they would continue
to have benefit on online gambling as well.
Uh, so to put, um, into summary, we do support this bill.
We support the licensing framework with a cap
of 15 operators.
Um, we would like to see mandated harm prevention,
age verification, especially online.
And, um, that the offense provisions
and civil penalties as a deterrent
operators are in existence.
And we do, uh, want to acknowledge that the spill's goal is
to reduce the gambling harm through stronger regulation.
And we hope that our suggestions, uh,
to you today will be helpful in doing so
and providing safeguards around advertising
and importantly that requirement for operators
to reinvest into New Zealand communities.
Yeah, thank you very much. Happy
to take any questions if you have any.
Thanks. Um, me, Tanya, can I ask a quick one
and then Lamon has one as well.
Um, really good to hear that first point about, uh,
social media influence
and some of the other targeted advertising.
The, um, the point you made about supporting a licensing
framework with a cap of 15, is that a really intentional,
you think 15 is the right number,
or you just like the principle
of having a cap on the number, whatever it is?
Uh, we really like the principle of having a cap.
Uh, what we've done to reduce gambling harm
and door shooter is we've also provided a cap
and quite our restrictions around that.
So that can't be, um, if the license is sold,
that can't be passed on to a new operator,
and if the license moves, they cannot move.
Um, the gambling machines themselves, what
that does is essentially provide a sinking lid.
And we, you know,
if we could have looked back into the past,
we may have been more restrictive on the cap from the start.
Um, but we have seen that having a cap is beneficial.
So, uh, we do support 15, but, um, that that's the cap.
And maybe even over time we could see
a sinking lid on that too.
Yeah, some people suggested a low number, so for example,
if it was plucking numbers now, but if it was eight
or 10, that that wouldn't concern you.
It's just that you don't wanna see that explode.
Yep. Yeah, exactly. Okay, Thank you. Um, Laia, thank
You. Um, Chi, and
thank you for your, um,
submission, oral and written.
Um, there chair's already asked around the, um, license,
so I'll move to my next question, which is really quick.
Gambling harm is really important, um, to have those funded
and, uh, there's been ministry of health evidence.
Um, do you have any, uh, further ideas around safeguarding,
uh, and also the, the advertising
that you've already mentioned at the
last part of your submission?
Quite honestly, I think this needs
to be a discussion at a government level with the, uh,
social media platform owners.
Uh, they are really the only ones that have access
to the information that could confirm, um,
or the ones that could provide, um, a social media register.
So as an example, you do have to show that you are
old enough or you've got, uh, identification that's loaded,
that confirms that you are 18 plus.
Um, I think that that's really crucial, especially
with social media and knowing
that already there are New Zealand influencers being
offered, um, significant, um, money
to promote online gambling.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thanks so much for your time.
Appreciate you joining us, and, um, we will move with that.
We'll move on to our next submission. Thank you.
Uh, We're tennis Western Bay. Okay.
Uh, tennis Western Bay, plenty Roberts.
Um, you've got your mic, mic
and camera on, and then we'll be into it.
Thanks for keeping me. That's great.
Have you got, uh, can you hear us there, Robert?
Just might need to check if you've, um,
if you're muted or not.
We think it's good at this end,
Right? Can we hear me now?
Oh, that's fantastic. We can see you and hear you.
We've got, uh, 10 minutes.
You can take your written Es mission as, uh,
red leaves some time for questions.
I'll let you know when there's a minute
to run. The time is yours.
Thank you. Well, firstly, thank you
for allowing me to do this.
Um, my contribution this afternoon is specifically aimed at
the impact of the casino bill on, um,
on raising local funding that, uh, we've been used to
accessing through grants.
Now, who am I speaking on behalf of?
From the executive chair of Targa Western
of Tennis Western Bay.
Plenty, which covers the area from Wahi through ca Caddy,
including tga, um, down to to,
we've got within that space 10 clubs amounting to two
and a half thousand members.
Um, and it's been a growing area.
We've, we've been in existence for the last 16 years.
We've grown our sort of total tennis membership every year,
and it was 5% last year.
So we've quite, quite strong in terms of, of our growth.
And what I want to say this afternoon impacts
quite clearly on that.
Um, the, the, the point of tennis Western Bay is to,
to grow the sport, certainly as I've just referred to,
but it's also to meet the needs of those two
and a half thousand members and 10 clubs that we have.
And Tennis Western by itself is not a purely
administrative body.
Uh, we don't own courts.
We, we don't have a, an office where for volunteers
who form an executive,
and we do our very best to work to
what the needs of the clubs are.
It's a very democratic process.
Our clubs meet every month and they tell us what to do.
Um, and we do our very best to do that.
Now, what I wanted to look at was really the impact of the
what should happen if the legislation means
that grant funding
or the type we've had from, from casinos is, is, uh,
reduced any shape or form.
Um, and I wanted to, to look at it, try to get you
to understand it from the perspective that that we have.
We have, uh, as to what's it going to do
to us in our attempts to provide competition to,
to build the game, to produce junior players
to a national standard, which allows them
to perhaps have professional careers in the sport of tennis
or to, and many of them, for example, go to, um,
American universities on scholarships.
And to get to that level, they've got to have a lot
of support, both financially and, um, in terms of coaching.
So, so that's the objective that we, we have
as an organization.
We also have a larger, um, intention as well, which Mr.
Ruthford is, is aware of,
and that we want to develop tying into a tennis center.
We've got a long-term vision
and working with a number of different organizations,
we have to realize that within the next five to 10 years.
So, so what then happens for tennis clubs, if we have
to reduce funds for ourselves, we probably,
um, have an income from grants, which is
around about $60,000 per year if we're very lucky.
And where this goes to is to, to
provide for those needs.
For example, we have coaches who we need to build a,
um, a junior program.
We have two who are international,
have got international experience, and
therefore they're the best we we get for, um,
for young players to, to appreciate what a,
a tennis career is like.
They, um, pro provide in our Junior Pathways program a
a really good structure to build a base of very good players
and from them to pick out those
who can operate at national level.
Now, if we, if we lose our funding
or it's, let's say we get half of the funds available,
the sort of impact we'll have is that those coaches will be,
have to reduce or we will have to reduce the hours
that those coaches can provide.
They, um, they'll have to cut back on that.
Equally, we provide support for financial support
for our representative teams, those top players.
We pay all their costs when they travel
to national tournaments, which from
can be often in Christchurch.
And there's that sort of cost which the,
the grant funding gives us, um,
that will fall on parents unfortunately as well, the cost
of the individual coaching.
We have a coach who works in the Bay, the whole bay,
plenty area primarily in schools.
He is strongly supported financially by us
that will have an impact of spreading the word,
getting the people involved in
what is a really healthy sport.
One, which, um, people tend to play all of their lives,
uh, excuse me.
We'll have to reduce the cost of our manager.
The contracted manager currently about 35,000
thereabouts, cost to maintain her.
She's critical to the operation of our, our,
um, our competitions.
She's does all the communications, she contacts,
keeps the contacts with Tennis New Zealand,
and that will unfortunately, uh, have
reduced hours for her too.
The promotional events we run also will probably have
to be reduced because of, of scale.
Yes, we have a national, um, love tennis program,
which goes across the country,
but we have to put in the, the work
to support clubs to do that.
So in summary, I guess the impact of the,
the grant funding means a reduction in our effectiveness.
And what is a really good healthy sport.
When you look at it from the perspective of clubs,
the 10 clubs that we have, they do have less, uh,
property they have to maintain.
Um, they will, they also have coaches they have to pay,
and the same impact will occur on them.
So, you know, if we're not able to access other funding, uh,
then I guess what I'm suggesting is
that tennis is support in this area will slowly start
to disintegrate because of the costs of keeping it, uh,
upgraded until we can find some other source of funding.
So that's the essence of what I wanted
to say. Also. Thank you
Question very much. Yeah,
I'll, we'll hand over for the first question.
Tom Ruthford,
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chair and thank you, Robert.
Robert, do you, um,
appreciate the point you've made in the submission
and tend to agree around, uh, the redistribution
of funds back into the community for
funding receive money received through online gambling?
Do you, is there a mechanism that you think would work
best to do that?
Would it be something similar to
what is already applied in class for,
or do you have some sort of other way
that you think it would work best?
It's, it's really sort of keeping it relatively close
to the status quo as, as far as we can, I mean,
absolutely appreciate the reason for
the legislation, the intent behind it.
Um, unfortunately, I don't necessarily think
in terms of those solutions.
We don't have a sufficient experience
or knowledge to, to come up with it.
But the, the, um, just, I think it's, it's having a,
having a pool that's contestable and accessible.
Thank you. And, uh, Lamon, Lydia Sini. Thank you. And
Just a very quick question,
following on from Tom's question.
Um, you made your, the comments, uh, towards the end
that tennis sport of tennis will slowly disintegrate.
Uh, you were really concerned about this. Yes.
Over time, if the community funding disappears,
Yeah. Part, part of
my my own professional job, I always have
to think worst case, and so therefore that tends to apply.
But if you take a, say a smaller club, like, um,
it's got really lovely facilities,
it's just had its courts resurfaced, they,
they don't need a heck of a lot of grant money.
But what they have goes into their junior coaching
that we're talking about 10, $12,000 worth
of grants failure.
You know, in order to keep the junior costing,
the funds are gonna have to come from somewhere else if they
can't access them by grants or can only get lesser amounts.
And, and it then becomes priorities.
The priorities for us are children and,
and players keeping players access to, to, to this game.
And therefore the sort of facilities tend
to take a back seat.
So that's what I meant, that over a period
of time there'll be less spent on, on the things
that should be spent in maintaining courts,
maintaining nets, making sure the surfaces are right.
Uh, to a lesser extent,
probably buildings won't be
maintained as well as they should.
Thank you. Thank you very much for taking the time
to join us today, Robert.
We're really grateful. Um, and wish your club all the best
and with that, we're gonna move on to our next submission.
Thank you very much. Thank you. Uh,
We're, Yeah,
And they're in the zoom, just camera on.
Oh, fantastic. Uh, Tiki, we can see,
uh, your camera's on now.
We're there. We are. Welcome. Thank you for joining us.
We've, we've set aside up to 10 minutes for this submission
and, um, you might like to leave some time for questions,
uh, and you can take your written submission
as read the time is yours.
Um,
I'm here today on behalf of TE
and as a chartered accountant, um,
who has worked in social services
and the nonprofit sector for many, many years
I've experienced as a funder, um,
previously administering lottery
and crown grants, uh, with DIA
and as a grant funding receiver supporting, um,
organizations to gain funding to do good in our communities.
I carry the support of organizations like the koman
Independent Living Trust, the Hamilton Hearing Association,
and of course, ang the principle
that gambling exists to benefit the community is why we
passed the gambling act in 2003, it was
outside on New Zealand's way
of saying gambling must be controlled, harm minimized,
and money from gambling must be returned
to do good in the community.
I've always thought that without Class four gaming machine
investment into club rugby,
arguably the grassroots would never have been strong enough
to sustain our national game.
And the mighty All Blacks may have just been the All Blacks.
And it's not just sport volunteer firefighters missing
dinner across n
and Ang knitting hats
for orphan babies in Ukraine and Russia.
A purpose built building in Koman where Council Iwi NGOs
and government came together to provide a shared asset
for rurally isolated communities.
A committee of hearing impaired old boys in Hamilton
who meet faithfully every third Tuesday
to support their a hundred plus membership.
A group of botanists at the Patan Gardens in Topo,
volunteering every Thursday, keeping the gardens immaculate.
Can you picture Graham out in the sun today serving his
community on his brand new ride on lawnmower?
All of this supported by lottery
or class four gaming trust for their, um, uh, for community.
Good. But I'm really here to talk about our ko
w give their time freely every week to support ko
to grow Maori in our homes, hapu
and communities so can grow boldly Maori.
Just this afternoon, our on their lunch break, um,
to do some strategic planning.
This is the spirit of volunteering,
of neighbors gathering together, of wau stepping up
to support the community as part of
what opens our culture as a nation.
Being Kiwi, this committee knows the spirit
well, just a few.
Mr. Foster, your work with conservation groups and Mr.
Rutherford with sport
and volunteer firefighting, many others.
That spirit is at risk when funding streams
that have sustained it are weakened or diverted offshore.
Should it be sustained by gambling?
Maybe not, but I don't know
that this bill is the place to answer that question.
We have long had a deal in Alt New Zealand
and this bill risk breaking that deal, the $20 someone has
to spare to, um, to gamble can only be spent once if it goes
to an online casino with no obligation to give back.
Its lost to Marai Sports Clubs
and the volunteer spirit that keeps
South and New Zealand alive.
We don't believe it's intentional.
We wholeheartedly, um, agree with hug Ketel in saying
that over time gambling monies will reduce
as it's channeled online casinos.
This committee has the opportunity to make the changes
for the benefit of our communities.
Now let me be clear. We agree that regulation is needed.
Ideally, an outright ban would be best for all our,
but with the nature of digital assets, we know
that there will always be a black
market for gambling available.
We've seen this with cs.
Go skin trading and cryptocurrency based, um, casinos
gambling will always be with us in a free society.
Is it, it is inevitable,
but if it is inevitable, it must be on our terms,
not the terms of offshore operators
who profit while our communities will lose out.
We also wanna point out that a country regulating
online gambling isn't the end.
It's the start further investment in education
and whanau are to prevent whanau
and community harm from online gambling is essential.
Talking to those affected
and constantly reviewing whether we've set the guardrails
right, part
of those guardrails must be stripped rules on advertising.
Already we've seen Maori influencers on TikTok
and Instagram used to push online casinos at Ranta.
We've heard whanau who believe these sites are legitimate
because they saw a Maori influencer winning big on a page
stream that's not harm minimization, it's manipulation.
You might say, well, this is already illegal,
but the ability for DIA to act needs to be strengthened
to be able to respond to the changing nature
of online advertising and gambling.
We have specific rules for alcohol,
tobacco, and pornography.
We need the same for online gambling.
Protect our una stop influencer marketing
and stop the normalization of gambling and newsfeeds.
As it stands, casinos have unregulated pipelines into the
brains of our ran viral means
and videos across the internet.
Just today, inexplicably have the largest online casinos
logos in the bottom right hand corner.
Why? And then there's t Maria
disproportionately harmed by gambling.
I don't need to tell you guys that the Crown has a duty
of active protection.
That means not just acknowledging harm,
but co-designing solutions with Maori,
anything less fails our our
communities and fails the treaty.
So just in, uh, in, in finishing, our recommendations are
that funds be distributed, localized
through localized committees tied
to the geographical location
and other target metrics to ensure distribution equity.
We also agree with the children's
commission's recommendations.
Online gambling restricted to 20 plus with regularization,
uh, sorry, regulations with limits for users
between 20 and 25.
We think five is a good number for licenses
ban all advertising the way that we do
for tobacco products implement compulsory age
and identification, uh, identity verification, sorry,
quarter to our una.
This bill should be a living document that is agile enough
to deal with the constantly changing needs of our UNA
and their online safety.
And finally invest, um,
increase investment in gambling education in schools so that
when they see an influencer online and being a bad actor
and breaking the law by advertising those things,
they understand the truth
of the matter when it comes to gambling.
Thank you. Uh, we've got two minutes left for questions.
I'll start with Benjamin Doyle.
So, um, Benjamin Doy.
So, um, you mentioned,
and you also mentioned the need.
Sorry about my camera. It's a little bit, um,
extreme, but that's all right.
Uh, the need to make sure that and Una voices are included.
Um, I just wanna understand what your perception is of
how we could better implement te or considerations
and UNA considerations, um,
in the process we're currently undergoing
and how we might implement changes in amendments.
If this, uh, bill can,
when this bill continues forward in the process, um,
how might you see those perspectives feeding in, in a kind
of process that's already been set in motion?
Is there a way we could meaningfully do that?
I, I, I've got lots of thoughts on this, but
because I'm speaking on behalf, I'll just talk about our,
um, our are engaging in online games and in online gaming.
They're gambling already.
Um, and so this bill needs to be the start of what we do
as a, um, a, a country in terms of, um, looking
after our mouna.
This should go out further to games, to, um,
all all those things that our are engaging on
and that pipeline of them through to online casinos.
That's not what we, we want our money going.
Ideally, we wouldn't have any gambling
and we could fund our community through other avenues,
but that's where we are.
And just some in terms of, um, te
or I think I've only heard one other submitted today mention
Tet, but I just wonder how you might see it embedded more
strongly in the legislation itself, if you have any,
um, ideas about that. Yeah,
No, a hundred, a hundred percent.
I think we should name Maori as a, um, as a party
that will be disproportionately affected.
So when we're making regulation around, um, um, advertising,
we are specifically, um, naming, um,
targeting Ranga Tahi Maori as a, as a group that is illegal
to, to target mu Maori as illegal to target,
like specifically naming them as well as you might say,
well, they're already named by these other groupings,
but specifically naming them, um, allows, uh, i, I guess,
uh, respect to the principles
And, and just thank you, uh, for your submission.
Uh, AMI just to supplementary on that,
you mentioned your last comment was gambling
education in schools.
What may that look like?
Um, it's, sorry, it's not my area of expertise,
but I just know, we just know that our,
and we are not set up for that either like our four or five.
They're playing Fortnite and, um, roadblocks
and there is gambling there, there, this, this is the start
of their pipeline into, um, into gambling.
And so I don't know the answer to that question,
but I'm saying I'm asking the committee, this needs
to be part of the consideration when we,
um, creating articulations.
Thank you, uh, so much for taking the time
to join us today.
That brings us to the end of that submission.
Wish you all the best and I'm expecting that's the end.
That is the end of submissions.
There won't be anything in private.
So members, thank you for your support today.
Thank you to our officials, um,
and Clarks who have been supporting us all day.
And we will see you all on Wednesday morning. Killer.